VOLUME 1
BOOK 1. REVELATION (1-6)
Volume 1, Book 1, Number 1:
Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "The reward of deeds depends upon the
intentions and every person will get the reward according to what he has
intended. So whoever emigrated for worldly benefits or for a woman to
marry, his emigration was for what he emigrated for."

Volume 1, Book 1, Number 2:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the mother of the faithful believers) Al-Harith bin Hisham asked Allah's
Apostle "O Allah's Apostle! How is the Divine Inspiration revealed to you?"
Allah's Apostle replied, "Sometimes it is (revealed) like the ringing of a bell,
this form of Inspiration is the hardest of all and then this state passes ' off
after I have grasped what is inspired. Sometimes the Angel comes in the
form of a man and talks to me and I grasp whatever he says." 'Aisha added:
Verily I saw the Prophet being inspired Divinely on a very cold day and
noticed the Sweat dropping from his forehead (as the Inspiration was over).

Volume 1, Book 1, Number 3:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the mother of the faithful believers) The commencement of the Divine
Inspiration to Allah's Apostle was in the form of good dreams which came
true like bright day light, and then the love of seclusion was bestowed upon
him. He used to go in seclusion in the cave of Hira where he used to worship
(Allah alone) continuously for many days before his desire to see his family.
He used to take with him the journey food for the stay and then come back
to (his wife) Khadija to take his food like-wise again till suddenly the Truth
descended upon him while he was in the cave of Hira. The angel came to
him and asked him to read. The Prophet replied, "I do not know how to
read.
The Prophet added, "The angel caught me (forcefully) and pressed me so
hard that I could not bear it any more. He then released me and again asked
me to read and I replied, 'I do not know how to read.' Thereupon he caught
me again and pressed me a second time till I could not bear it any more. He
then released me and again asked me to read but again I replied, 'I do not
know how to read (or what shall I read)?' Thereupon he caught me for the
third time and pressed me, and then released me and said, 'Read in the
name of your Lord, who has created (all that exists) has created man from a
clot. Read! And your Lord is the Most Generous." (96.1, 96.2, 96.3) Then
Allah's Apostle returned with the Inspiration and with his heart beating
severely. Then he went to Khadija bint Khuwailid and said, "Cover me! Cover
me!" They covered him till his fear was over and after that he told her
everything that had happened and said, "I fear that something may happen
to me." Khadija replied, "Never! By Allah, Allah will never disgrace you. You
keep good relations with your Kith and kin, help the poor and the destitute,
serve your guests generously and assist the deserving calamity-afflicted
ones."
Khadija then accompanied him to her cousin Waraqa bin Naufal bin Asad bin
'Abdul 'Uzza, who, during the PreIslamic Period became a Christian and used
to write the writing with Hebrew letters. He would write from the Gospel in
Hebrew as much as Allah wished him to write. He was an old man and had
lost his eyesight. Khadija said to Waraqa, "Listen to the story of your
nephew, O my cousin!" Waraqa asked, "O my nephew! What have you
seen?" Allah's Apostle described whatever he had seen. Waraqa said, "This is
the same one who keeps the secrets (angel Gabriel) whom Allah had sent to
Moses. I wish I were young and could live up to the time when your people
would turn you out." Allah's Apostle asked, "Will they drive me out?"
Waraqa replied in the affirmative and said, "Anyone (man) who came with
something similar to what you have brought was treated with hostility; and
if I should remain alive till the day when you will be turned out then I would
support you strongly." But after a few days Waraqa died and the Divine
Inspiration was also paused for a while.
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah Al-Ansari while talking about the period of
pause in revelation reporting the speech of the Prophet "While I was
walking, all of a sudden I heard a voice from the sky. I looked up and saw the
same angel who had visited me at the cave of Hira' sitting on a chair
between the sky and the earth. I got afraid of him and came back home and
said, 'Wrap me (in blankets).' And then Allah revealed the following Holy
Verses (of Quran):
'O you (i.e. Muhammad)! wrapped up in garments!' Arise and warn (the
people against Allah's Punishment),... up to 'and desert the idols.' (74.1-5)
After this the revelation started coming strongly, frequently and regularly."

Volume 1, Book 1, Number 4:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
Ibn 'Abbas in the explanation of the Statement of Allah. 'Move not your
tongue concerning (the Quran) to make haste therewith." (75.16) Said
"Allah's Apostle used to bear the revelation with great trouble and used to
move his lips (quickly) with the Inspiration." Ibn 'Abbas moved his lips
saying, "I am moving my lips in front of you as Allah's Apostle used to move
his." Said moved his lips saying: "I am moving my lips, as I saw Ibn 'Abbas
moving his." Ibn 'Abbas added, "So Allah revealed 'Move not your tongue
concerning (the Qur'an) to make haste therewith. It is for us to collect it and
to give you (O Muhammad) the ability to recite it (the Qur'an) (75.16-17)
which means that Allah will make him (the Prophet ) remember the portion
of the Qur'an which was revealed at that time by heart and recite it. The
Statement of Allah: And 'When we have recited it to you (O Muhammad
through Gabriel) then you follow its (Qur'an) recital' (75.18) means 'listen to
it and be silent.' Then it is for Us (Allah) to make It clear to you' (75.19)
means 'Then it is (for Allah) to make you recite it (and its meaning will be
clear by itself through your tongue). Afterwards, Allah's Apostle used to
listen to Gabriel whenever he came and after his departure he used to recite
it as Gabriel had recited it."

Volume 1, Book 1, Number 5:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle was the most generous of all the people, and he used to
reach the peak in generosity in the month of Ramadan when Gabriel met
him. Gabriel used to meet him every night of Ramadan to teach him the
Qur'an. Allah's Apostle was the most generous person, even more generous
than the strong uncontrollable wind (in readiness and haste to do charitable
deeds).

Volume 1, Book 1, Number 6:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
Abu Sufyan bin Harb informed me that Heraclius had sent a messenger to
him while he had been accompanying a caravan from Quraish. They were
merchants doing business in Sham (Syria, Palestine, Lebanon and Jordan), at
the time when Allah's Apostle had truce with Abu Sufyan and Quraish
infidels. So Abu Sufyan and his companions went to Heraclius at Ilya
(Jerusalem). Heraclius called them in the court and he had all the senior
Roman dignitaries around him. He called for his translator who, translating
Heraclius's question said to them, "Who amongst you is closely related to
that man who claims to be a Prophet?" Abu Sufyan replied, "I am the
nearest relative to him (amongst the group)."
Heraclius said, "Bring him (Abu Sufyan) close to me and make his
companions stand behind him." Abu Sufyan added, Heraclius told his
translator to tell my companions that he wanted to put some questions to
me regarding that man (The Prophet) and that if I told a lie they (my
companions) should contradict me." Abu Sufyan added, "By Allah! Had I not
been afraid of my companions labeling me a liar, I would not have spoken
the truth about the Prophet. The first question he asked me about him was:
'What is his family status amongst you?'
I replied, 'He belongs to a good (noble) family amongst us.'
Heraclius further asked, 'Has anybody amongst you ever claimed the same
(i.e. to be a Prophet) before him?'
I replied, 'No.'
He said, 'Was anybody amongst his ancestors a king?'
I replied, 'No.'
Heraclius asked, 'Do the nobles or the poor follow him?'
I replied, 'It is the poor who follow him.'
He said, 'Are his followers increasing decreasing (day by day)?'
I replied, 'They are increasing.'
He then asked, 'Does anybody amongst those who embrace his religion
become displeased and renounce the religion afterwards?'
I replied, 'No.'
Heraclius said, 'Have you ever accused him of telling lies before his claim (to
be a Prophet)?'
I replied, 'No. '
Heraclius said, 'Does he break his promises?'
I replied, 'No. We are at truce with him but we do not know what he will do
in it.' I could not find opportunity to say anything against him except that.
Heraclius asked, 'Have you ever had a war with him?'
I replied, 'Yes.'
Then he said, 'What was the outcome of the battles?'
I replied, 'Sometimes he was victorious and sometimes we.'
Heraclius said, 'What does he order you to do?'
I said, 'He tells us to worship Allah and Allah alone and not to worship
anything along with Him, and to renounce all that our ancestors had said. He
orders us to pray, to speak the truth, to be chaste and to keep good
relations with our Kith and kin.'
Heraclius asked the translator to convey to me the following, I asked you
about his family and your reply was that he belonged to a very noble family.
In fact all the Apostles come from noble families amongst their respective
peoples. I questioned you whether anybody else amongst you claimed such
a thing, your reply was in the negative. If the answer had been in the
affirmative, I would have thought that this man was following the previous
man's statement. Then I asked you whether anyone of his ancestors was a
king. Your reply was in the negative, and if it had been in the affirmative, I
would have thought that this man wanted to take back his ancestral
kingdom.
I further asked whether he was ever accused of telling lies before he said
what he said, and your reply was in the negative. So I wondered how a
person who does not tell a lie about others could ever tell a lie about Allah. I,
then asked you whether the rich people followed him or the poor. You
replied that it was the poor who followed him. And in fact all the Apostle
have been followed by this very class of people. Then I asked you whether
his followers were increasing or decreasing. You replied that they were
increasing, and in fact this is the way of true faith, till it is complete in all
respects. I further asked you whether there was anybody, who, after
embracing his religion, became displeased and discarded his religion. Your
reply was in the negative, and in fact this is (the sign of) true faith, when its
delight enters the hearts and mixes with them completely. I asked you
whether he had ever betrayed. You replied in the negative and likewise the
Apostles never betray. Then I asked you what he ordered you to do. You
replied that he ordered you to worship Allah and Allah alone and not to
worship any thing along with Him and forbade you to worship idols and
ordered you to pray, to speak the truth and to be chaste. If what you have
said is true, he will very soon occupy this place underneath my feet and I
knew it (from the scriptures) that he was going to appear but I did not know
that he would be from you, and if I could reach him definitely, I would go
immediately to meet him and if I were with him, I would certainly wash his
feet.' Heraclius then asked for the letter addressed by Allah's Apostle
which was delivered by Dihya to the Governor of Busra, who forwarded it to
Heraclius to read. The contents of the letter were as follows: "In the name
of Allah the Beneficent, the Merciful (This letter is) from Muhammad the
slave of Allah and His Apostle to Heraclius the ruler of Byzantine. Peace be
upon him, who follows the right path. Furthermore I invite you to Islam, and
if you become a Muslim you will be safe, and Allah will double your reward,
and if you reject this invitation of Islam you will be committing a sin by
misguiding your Arisiyin (peasants). (And I recite to you Allah's Statement:)
'O people of the scripture! Come to a word common to you and us that we
worship none but Allah and that we associate nothing in worship with Him,
and that none of us shall take others as Lords beside Allah. Then, if they turn
away, say: Bear witness that we are Muslims (those who have surrendered
to Allah).' (3:64).
Abu Sufyan then added, "When Heraclius had finished his speech and had
read the letter, there was a great hue and cry in the Royal Court. So we were
turned out of the court. I told my companions that the question of Ibn-AbiKabsha) (the Prophet Muhammad) has become so prominent that even the
King of Bani Al-Asfar (Byzantine) is afraid of him. Then I started to become
sure that he (the Prophet) would be the conqueror in the near future till I
embraced Islam (i.e. Allah guided me to it)."
The sub narrator adds, "Ibn An-Natur was the Governor of llya' (Jerusalem)
and Heraclius was the head of the Christians of Sham. Ibn An-Natur narrates
that once while Heraclius was visiting ilya' (Jerusalem), he got up in the
morning with a sad mood. Some of his priests asked him why he was in that
mood? Heraclius was a foreteller and an astrologer. He replied, 'At night
when I looked at the stars, I saw that the leader of those who practice
circumcision had appeared (become the conqueror). Who are they who
practice circumcision?' The people replied, 'Except the Jews nobody
practices circumcision, so you should not be afraid of them (Jews).
'Just Issue orders to kill every Jew present in the country.'
While they were discussing it, a messenger sent by the king of Ghassan to
convey the news of Allah's Apostle to Heraclius was brought in. Having
heard the news, he (Heraclius) ordered the people to go and see whether
the messenger of Ghassan was circumcised. The people, after seeing him,
told Heraclius that he was circumcised. Heraclius then asked him about the
Arabs. The messenger replied, 'Arabs also practice circumcision.'
(After hearing that) Heraclius remarked that sovereignty of the 'Arabs had
appeared. Heraclius then wrote a letter to his friend in Rome who was as
good as Heraclius in knowledge. Heraclius then left for Homs. (a town in
Syrian and stayed there till he received the reply of his letter from his friend
who agreed with him in his opinion about the emergence of the Prophet
and the fact that he was a Prophet. On that Heraclius invited all the heads of
the Byzantines to assemble in his palace at Homs. When they assembled, he
ordered that all the doors of his palace be closed. Then he came out and
said, 'O Byzantines! If success is your desire and if you seek right guidance
and want your empire to remain then give a pledge of allegiance to this
Prophet (i.e. embrace Islam).'
(On hearing the views of Heraclius) the people ran towards the gates of the
palace like onagers but found the doors closed. Heraclius realized their
hatred towards Islam and when he lost the hope of their embracing Islam,
he ordered that they should be brought back in audience.
(When they returned) he said, 'What already said was just to test the
strength of your conviction and I have seen it.' The people prostrated before
him and became pleased with him, and this was the end of Heraclius's story
(in connection with his faith).
BOOK 2. BELIEF (7-55)
Volume 1, Book 2, Number 7:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said: Islam is based on (the following) five (principles):
1. To testify that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and
Muhammad is Allah's Apostle.
2. To offer the (compulsory congregational) prayers dutifully and perfectly.
3. To pay Zakat (i.e. obligatory charity) .
4. To perform Hajj. (i.e. Pilgrimage to Mecca)
5. To observe fast during the month of Ramadan.

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 8:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Faith (Belief) consists of more than sixty branches (i.e.
parts). And Haya (This term "Haya" covers a large number of concepts
which are to be taken together; amongst them are self respect, modesty,
bashfulness, and scruple, etc.) is a part of faith."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 9:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
The Prophet said, "A Muslim is the one who avoids harming Muslims with his
tongue and hands. And a Muhajir (emigrant) is the one who gives up
(abandons) all what Allah has forbidden."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 10:
Narrated Abu Musa:
Some people asked Allah's Apostle, "Whose Islam is the best? i.e. (Who is a
very good Muslim)?" He replied, "One who avoids harming the Muslims with
his tongue and hands."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 11:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
A man asked the Prophet , "What sort of deeds or (what qualities of) Islam
are good?" The Prophet replied, 'To feed (the poor) and greet those whom
you know and those whom you do not Know (See Hadith No. 27).

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 12:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "None of you will have faith till he wishes for his (Muslim)
brother what he likes for himself."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 13:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
"Allah's Apostle said, "By Him in Whose Hands my life is, none of you will
have faith till he loves me more than his father and his children."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 14:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said "None of you will have faith till he loves me more than his
father, his children and all mankind."
Volume 1, Book 2, Number 15:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "Whoever possesses the following three qualities will
have the sweetness (delight) of faith:
1. The one to whom Allah and His Apostle becomes dearer than anything
else.
2. Who loves a person and he loves him only for Allah's sake.
3. Who hates to revert to Atheism (disbelief) as he hates to be thrown into
the fire."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 16:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "Love for the Ansar is a sign of faith and hatred for the
Ansar is a sign of hypocrisy."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 17:
Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit:
who took part in the battle of Badr and was a Naqib (a person heading a
group of six persons), on the night of Al-'Aqaba pledge: Allah's Apostle said
while a group of his companions were around him, "Swear allegiance to me
for:
1. Not to join anything in worship along with Allah.
2. Not to steal.
3. Not to commit illegal sexual intercourse.
4. Not to kill your children.
5. Not to accuse an innocent person (to spread such an accusation among
people).
6. Not to be disobedient (when ordered) to do good deed."
The Prophet added: "Whoever among you fulfills his pledge will be
rewarded by Allah. And whoever indulges in any one of them (except the
ascription of partners to Allah) and gets the punishment in this world, that
punishment will be an expiation for that sin. And if one indulges in any of
them, and Allah conceals his sin, it is up to Him to forgive or punish him (in
the Hereafter)." 'Ubada bin As-Samit added: "So we swore allegiance for
these." (points to Allah's Apostle)

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 18:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle said, "A time will come that the best property of a Muslim
will be sheep which he will take on the top of mountains and the places of
rainfall (valleys) so as to flee with his religion from afflictions."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 19:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Whenever Allah's Apostle ordered the Muslims to do something, he used to
order them deeds which were easy for them to do, (according to their
strength endurance). They said, "O Allah's Apostle! We are not like you.
Allah has forgiven your past and future sins." So Allah's Apostle became
angry and it was apparent on his face. He said, "I am the most Allah fearing,
and know Allah better than all of you do."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 20:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "Whoever possesses the following three qualities will
taste the sweetness of faith:
1. The one to whom Allah and His Apostle become dearer than anything else.
2. Who loves a person and he loves him only for Allah's sake.
3. Who hates to revert to disbelief (Atheism) after Allah has brought (saved)
him out from it, as he hates to be thrown in fire."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 21:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said, "When the people of Paradise will enter Paradise and the
people of Hell will go to Hell, Allah will order those who have had faith equal
to the weight of a grain of mustard seed to be taken out from Hell. So they
will be taken out but (by then) they will be blackened (charred). Then they
will be put in the river of Haya' (rain) or Hayat (life) (the Narrator is in doubt
as to which is the right term), and they will revive like a grain that grows
near the bank of a flood channel. Don't you see that it comes out yellow and
twisted"

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 22:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle said, "While I was sleeping I saw (in a dream) some people
wearing shirts of which some were reaching up to the breasts only while
others were even shorter than that. Umar bin Al-Khattab was shown
wearing a shirt that he was dragging." The people asked, "How did you
interpret it? (What is its interpretation) O Allah's Apostle?" He (the Prophet )
replied, "It is the Religion."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 23:
Narrated 'Abdullah (bin 'Umar):
Once Allah's Apostle passed by an Ansari (man) who was admonishing to his
brother regarding Haya'. On that Allah's Apostle said, "Leave him as Haya' is
a part of faith." (See Hadith No. 8)

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 24:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said: "I have been ordered (by Allah) to fight against the
people until they testify that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah
and that Muhammad is Allah's Apostle, and offer the prayers perfectly and
give the obligatory charity, so if they perform a that, then they save their
lives an property from me except for Islamic laws and then their reckoning
(accounts) will be done by Allah."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 25:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle was asked, "What is the best deed?" He replied, "To believe
in Allah and His Apostle (Muhammad). The questioner then asked, "What is
the next (in goodness)? He replied, "To participate in Jihad (religious
fighting) in Allah's Cause." The questioner again asked, "What is the next (in
goodness)?" He replied, "To perform Hajj (Pilgrim age to Mecca) 'Mubrur,
(which is accepted by Allah and is performed with the intention of seeking
Allah's pleasure only and not to show off and without committing a sin and
in accordance with the traditions of the Prophet)."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 26:
Narrated Sa'd:
Allah's Apostle distributed (Zakat) amongst (a group of) people while I was
sitting there but Allah's Apostle left a man whom I thought the best of the
lot. I asked, "O Allah's Apostle! Why have you left that person? By Allah I
regard him as a faithful believer." The Prophet commented: "Or merely a
Muslim." I remained quiet for a while, but could not help repeating my
question because of what I knew about him. And then asked Allah's Apostle,
"Why have you left so and so? By Allah! He is a faithful believer." The
Prophet again said, "Or merely a Muslim." And I could not help repeating my
question because of what I knew about him. Then the Prophet said, "O Sa'd!
I give to a person while another is dearer to me, for fear that he might be
thrown on his face in the Fire by Allah."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 27:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
A person asked Allah's Apostle . "What (sort of) deeds in or (what qualities
of) Islam are good?" He replied, "To feed (the poor) and greet those whom
you know and those whom you don't know."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 28:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said: "I was shown the Hell-fire and that the majority of its
dwellers were women who were ungrateful." It was asked, "Do they
disbelieve in Allah?" (or are they ungrateful to Allah?) He replied, "They are
ungrateful to their husbands and are ungrateful for the favors and the good
(charitable deeds) done to them. If you have always been good
(benevolent) to one of them and then she sees something in you (not of her
liking), she will say, 'I have never received any good from you."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 29:
Narrated Al-Ma'rur:
At Ar-Rabadha I met Abu Dhar who was wearing a cloak, and his slave, too,
was wearing a similar one. I asked about the reason for it. He replied, "I
abused a person by calling his mother with bad names." The Prophet said to
me, 'O Abu Dhar! Did you abuse him by calling his mother with bad names
You still have some characteristics of ignorance. Your slaves are your
brothers and Allah has put them under your command. So whoever has a
brother under his command should feed him of what he eats and dress him
of what he wears. Do not ask them (slaves) to do things beyond their
capacity (power) and if you do so, then help them.' "

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 30:
Narrated Al-Ahnaf bin Qais:
While I was going to help this man ('Ali Ibn Abi Talib), Abu Bakra met me and
asked, "Where are you going?" I replied, "I am going to help that person."
He said, "Go back for I have heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'When two
Muslims fight (meet) each other with their swords, both the murderer as
well as the murdered will go to the Hell-fire.' I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! It is all
right for the murderer but what about the murdered one?' Allah's Apostle
replied, "He surely had the intention to kill his companion."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 31:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
When the following Verse was revealed: "It is those who believe and
confuse not their belief with wrong (worshipping others besides Allah.)"
(6:83), the companions of Allah's Apostle asked, "Who is amongst us who
had not done injustice (wrong)?" Allah revealed: "No doubt, joining others in
worship with Allah is a great injustice (wrong) indeed." (31.13)

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 32:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The signs of a hypocrite are three:
1. Whenever he speaks, he tells a lie.
2. Whenever he promises, he always breaks it (his promise ).
3. If you trust him, he proves to be dishonest. (If you keep something as a
trust with him, he will not return it.)"

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 33:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
The Prophet said, "Whoever has the following four (characteristics) will be a
pure hypocrite and whoever has one of the following four characteristics
will have one characteristic of hypocrisy unless and until he gives it up.
1. Whenever he is entrusted, he betrays.
2. Whenever he speaks, he tells a lie.
3. Whenever he makes a covenant, he proves treacherous.
4. Whenever he quarrels, he behaves in a very imprudent, evil and insulting
manner."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 34:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever establishes the prayers on the night of Qadr
out of sincere faith and hoping to attain Allah's rewards (not to show off)
then all his past sins will be forgiven."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 35:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The person who participates in (Holy battles) in Allah's
cause and nothing compels him to do so except belief in Allah and His
Apostles, will be recompensed by Allah either with a reward, or booty (if he
survives) or will be admitted to Paradise (if he is killed in the battle as a
martyr). Had I not found it difficult for my followers, then I would not
remain behind any sariya going for Jihad and I would have loved to be
martyred in Allah's cause and then made alive, and then martyred and then
made alive, and then again martyred in His cause."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 36:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said: "Whoever establishes prayers during the nights of
Ramadan faithfully out of sincere faith and hoping to attain Allah's rewards
(not for showing off), all his past sins will be forgiven."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 37:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever observes fasts during the month of Ramadan
out of sincere faith, and hoping to attain Allah's rewards, then all his past
sins will be forgiven."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 38:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Religion is very easy and whoever overburdens himself in
his religion will not be able to continue in that way. So you should not be
extremists, but try to be near to perfection and receive the good tidings that
you will be rewarded; and gain strength by worshipping in the mornings, the
nights." (See Fath-ul-Bari, Page 102, Vol 1).
Volume 1, Book 2, Number 39:
Narrated Al-Bara' (bin 'Azib):
When the Prophet came to Medina, he stayed first with his grandfathers or
maternal uncles from Ansar. He offered his prayers facing Baitul-Maqdis
(Jerusalem) for sixteen or seventeen months, but he wished that he could
pray facing the Ka'ba (at Mecca). The first prayer which he offered facing
the Ka'ba was the 'Asr prayer in the company of some people. Then one of
those who had offered that prayer with him came out and passed by some
people in a mosque who were bowing during their prayers (facing
Jerusalem). He said addressing them, "By Allah, I testify that I have prayed
with Allah's Apostle facing Mecca (Ka'ba).' Hearing that, those people
changed their direction towards the Ka'ba immediately. Jews and the
people of the scriptures used to be pleased to see the Prophet facing
Jerusalem in prayers but when he changed his direction towards the Ka'ba,
during the prayers, they disapproved of it.
Al-Bara' added, "Before we changed our direction towards the Ka'ba
(Mecca) in prayers, some Muslims had died or had been killed and we did
not know what to say about them (regarding their prayers.) Allah then
revealed: And Allah would never make your faith (prayers) to be lost (i.e. the
prayers of those Muslims were valid).' " (2:143).

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 40:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If any one of you improve (follows strictly) his Islamic
religion then his good deeds will be rewarded ten times to seven hundred
times for each good deed and a bad deed will be recorded as it is."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 41:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Once the Prophet came while a woman was sitting with me. He said, "Who
is she?" I replied, "She is so and so," and told him about her (excessive)
praying. He said disapprovingly, "Do (good) deeds which is within your
capacity (without being overtaxed) as Allah does not get tired (of giving
rewards) but (surely) you will get tired and the best deed (act of Worship) in
the sight of Allah is that which is done regularly."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 42:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "Whoever said "None has the right to be worshipped but
Allah and has in his heart good (faith) equal to the weight of a barley grain
will be taken out of Hell. And whoever said: "None has the right to be
worshipped but Allah and has in his heart good (faith) equal to the weight of
a wheat grain will be taken out of Hell. And whoever said, "None has the
right to be worshipped but Allah and has in his heart good (faith) equal to
the weight of an atom will be taken out of Hell."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 43:
Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:
Once a Jew said to me, "O the chief of believers! There is a verse in your Holy
Book Which is read by all of you (Muslims), and had it been revealed to us,
we would have taken that day (on which it was revealed as a day of
celebration." 'Umar bin Al-Khattab asked, "Which is that verse?" The Jew
replied, "This day I have perfected your religion For you, completed My
favor upon you, And have chosen for you Islam as your religion." (5:3) 'Umar
replied,"No doubt, we know when and where this verse was revealed to the
Prophet. It was Friday and the Prophet was standing at 'Arafat (i.e. the Day
of Hajj)"

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 44:
Narrated Talha bin 'Ubaidullah:
A man from Najd with unkempt hair came to Allah's Apostle and we heard
his loud voice but could not understand what he was saying, till he came
near and then we came to know that he was asking about Islam. Allah's
Apostle said, "You have to offer prayers perfectly five times in a day and
night (24 hours)." The man asked, "Is there any more (praying)?" Allah's
Apostle replied, "No, but if you want to offer the Nawafil prayers (you can)."
Allah's Apostle further said to him: "You have to observe fasts during the
month of Ramad, an." The man asked, "Is there any more fasting?" Allah's
Apostle replied, "No, but if you want to observe the Nawafil fasts (you
can.)" Then Allah's Apostle further said to him, "You have to pay the Zakat
(obligatory charity)." The man asked, "Is there any thing other than the
Zakat for me to pay?" Allah's Apostle replied, "No, unless you want to give
alms of your own." And then that man retreated saying, "By Allah! I will
neither do less nor more than this." Allah's Apostle said, "If what he said is
true, then he will be successful (i.e. he will be granted Paradise)."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 45:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "(A believer) who accompanies the funeral procession
of a Muslim out of sincere faith and hoping to attain Allah's reward and
remains with it till the funeral prayer is offered and the burial ceremonies
are over, he will return with a reward of two Qirats. Each Qirat is like the size
of the (Mount) Uhud. He who offers the funeral prayer only and returns
before the burial, will return with the reward of one Qirat only."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 46:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "Abusing a Muslim is Fusuq (an evil doing) and killing him
is Kufr (disbelief)." Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit: "Allah's Apostle went out
to inform the people about the (date of the) night of decree (Al-Qadr) but
there happened a quarrel between two Muslim men. The Prophet said, "I
came out to inform you about (the date of) the night of Al-Qadr, but as so
and so and so and so quarrelled, its knowledge was taken away (I forgot it)
and maybe it was better for you. Now look for it in the 7th, the 9th and the
5th (of the last 10 nights of the month of Ramadan)."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 47:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
One day while the Prophet was sitting in the company of some people, (The
angel) Gabriel came and asked, "What is faith?" Allah's Apostle replied,
'Faith is to believe in Allah, His angels, (the) meeting with Him, His Apostles,
and to believe in Resurrection." Then he further asked, "What is Islam?"
Allah's Apostle replied, "To worship Allah Alone and none else, to offer
prayers perfectly to pay the compulsory charity (Zakat) and to observe fasts
during the month of Ramadan." Then he further asked, "What is Ihsan
(perfection)?" Allah's Apostle replied, "To worship Allah as if you see Him,
and if you cannot achieve this state of devotion then you must consider that
He is looking at you." Then he further asked, "When will the Hour be
established?" Allah's Apostle replied, "The answerer has no better
knowledge than the questioner. But I will inform you about its portents.
1. When a slave (lady) gives birth to her master.
2. When the shepherds of black camels start boasting and competing with
others in the construction of higher buildings. And the Hour is one of five
things which nobody knows except Allah.
The Prophet then recited: "Verily, with Allah (Alone) is the knowledge of the
Hour--." (31. 34) Then that man (Gabriel) left and the Prophet asked his
companions to call him back, but they could not see him. Then the Prophet
said, "That was Gabriel who came to teach the people their religion." Abu
'Abdullah said: He (the Prophet) considered all that as a part of faith.

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 48:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
I was informed by Abu Sufyan that Heraclius said to him, "I asked you
whether they (followers of Muhammad) were increasing or decreasing. You
replied that they were increasing. And in fact, this is the way of true Faith till
it is complete in all respects. I further asked you whether there was
anybody, who, after embracing his (the Prophets) religion (Islam) became
displeased and discarded it. You replied in the negative, and in fact, this is (a
sign of) true faith. When its delight enters the heart and mixes with them
completely, nobody can be displeased with it."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 49:
Narrated An-Nu'man bin Bashir:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'Both legal and illegal things are evident but in
between them there are doubtful (suspicious) things and most of the
people have no knowledge about them. So whoever saves himself from
these suspicious things saves his religion and his honor. And whoever
indulges in these suspicious things is like a shepherd who grazes (his
animals) near the Hima (private pasture) of someone else and at any
moment he is liable to get in it. (O people!) Beware! Every king has a Hima
and the Hima of Allah on the earth is His illegal (forbidden) things. Beware!
There is a piece of flesh in the body if it becomes good (reformed) the whole
body becomes good but if it gets spoilt the whole body gets spoilt and that
is the heart.

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 50:
Narrated Abu Jamra:
I used to sit with Ibn 'Abbas and he made me sit on his sitting place. He
requested me to stay with him in order that he might give me a share from
his property. So I stayed with him for two months. Once he told (me) that
when the delegation of the tribe of 'Abdul Qais came to the Prophet, the
Prophet asked them, "Who are the people (i.e. you)? (Or) who are the
delegate?" They replied, "We are from the tribe of Rabi'a." Then the Prophet
said to them, "Welcome! O people (or O delegation of 'Abdul Qais)! Neither
will you have disgrace nor will you regret." They said, "O Allah's Apostle! We
cannot come to you except in the sacred month and there is the infidel tribe
of Mudar intervening between you and us. So please order us to do
something good (religious deeds) so that we may inform our people whom
we have left behind (at home), and that we may enter Paradise (by acting
on them)." Then they asked about drinks (what is legal and what is illegal).
The Prophet ordered them to do four things and forbade them from four
things. He ordered them to believe in Allah Alone and asked them, "Do you
know what is meant by believing in Allah Alone?" They replied, "Allah and
His Apostle know better." Thereupon the Prophet said, "It means:
1. To testify that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and
Muhammad is Allah's Apostle.
2. To offer prayers perfectly
3. To pay the Zakat (obligatory charity)
4. To observe fast during the month of Ramadan.
5. And to pay Al-Khumus (one fifth of the booty to be given in Allah's Cause).
Then he forbade them four things, namely, Hantam, Dubba,' Naqir Ann
Muzaffat or Muqaiyar; (These were the names of pots in which Alcoholic
drinks were prepared) (The Prophet mentioned the container of wine and
he meant the wine itself). The Prophet further said (to them): "Memorize
them (these instructions) and convey them to the people whom you have
left behind."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 51:
Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:
Allah's Apostle said, "The reward of deeds depends upon the intention and
every person will get the reward according to what he has intended. So
whoever emigrated for Allah and His Apostle, then his emigration was for
Allah and His Apostle. And whoever emigrated for worldly benefits or for a
woman to marry, his emigration was for what he emigrated for."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 52:
Narrated Abu Mas'ud:
The Prophet said, "If a man spends on his family (with the intention of
having a reward from Allah) sincerely for Allah's sake then it is a (kind of)
alms-giving in reward for him.

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 53:
Narrated Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas:
Allah's Apostle said, "You will be rewarded for whatever you spend for
Allah's sake even if it were a morsel which you put in your wife's mouth."

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 54:
Narrated Jarir bin Abdullah:
I gave the pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle for the following:
1. offer prayers perfectly
2. pay the Zakat (obligatory charity)
3. and be sincere and true to every Muslim.

Volume 1, Book 2, Number 55:
Narrated Ziyad bin'Ilaqa:
I heard Jarir bin 'Abdullah (Praising Allah). On the day when Al-Mughira bin
Shu'ba died, he (Jarir) got up (on the pulpit) and thanked and praised Allah
and said, "Be afraid of Allah alone Who has none along with Him to be
worshipped.(You should) be calm and quiet till the (new) chief comes to you
and he will come to you soon. Ask Allah's forgiveness for your (late) chief
because he himself loved to forgive others." Jarir added, "Amma badu (now
then), I went to the Prophet and said, 'I give my pledge of allegiance to you
for Islam." The Prophet conditioned (my pledge) for me to be sincere and
true to every Muslim so I gave my pledge to him for this. By the Lord of this
mosque! I am sincere and true to you (Muslims). Then Jarir asked for Allah's
forgiveness and came down (from the pulpit).
BOOK 3. KNOWLEDGE (56-136)
Volume 1, Book 3, Number 56:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
While the Prophet was saying something in a gathering, a Bedouin came and
asked him, "When would the Hour (Doomsday) take place?" Allah's Apostle
continued his talk, so some people said that Allah's Apostle had heard the
question, but did not like what that Bedouin had asked. Some of them said
that Alllah's Apostle had not heard it. When the Prophet finished his speech,
he said, "Where is the questioner, who enquired about the Hour
(Doomsday)?" The Bedouin said, "I am here, O Allah's Apostle ." Then the
Prophet said, "When honesty is lost, then wait for the Hour (Doomsday)."
The Bedouin said, "How will that be lost?" The Prophet said, "When the
power or authority comes in the hands of unfit persons, then wait for the
Hour (Doomsday.)"

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 57:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
Once the Prophet remained behind us in a journey. He joined us while we
were performing ablution for the prayer which was over-due. We were just
passing wet hands over our feet (and not washing them properly) so the
Prophet addressed us in a loud voice and said twice or thrice: "Save your
heels from the fire."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 58:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Amongst the trees, there is a tree, the leaves of which
do not fall and is like a Muslim. Tell me the name of that tree." Everybody
started thinking about the trees of the desert areas. And I thought of the
date-palm tree but felt shy to answer the others then asked, "What is that
tree, O Allah's Apostle ?" He replied, "It is the date-palm tree."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 59:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "Amongst the trees, there is a tree, the leaves of which do
not fall and is like a Muslim. Tell me the name of that tree." Everybody
started thinking about the trees of the desert areas. And I thought of the
date-palm tree. The others then asked, "Please inform us what is that tree, O
Allah's Apostle?" He replied, "It is the date-palm tree."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 60:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
same as above Hadith 59.

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 61:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
same as above Hadith 59.

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 62:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
same as above Hadith 59.

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 63:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
While we were sitting with the Prophet in the mosque, a man came riding on
a camel. He made his camel kneel down in the mosque, tied its foreleg and
then said: "Who amongst you is Muhammad?" At that time the Prophet was
sitting amongst us (his companions) leaning on his arm. We replied, "This
white man reclining on his arm." The an then addressed him, "O Son of
'Abdul Muttalib."
The Prophet said, "I am here to answer your questions." The man said to the
Prophet, "I want to ask you something and will be hard in questioning. So do
not get angry." The Prophet said, "Ask whatever you want." The man said, "I
ask you by your Lord, and the Lord of those who were before you, has Allah
sent you as an Apostle to all the mankind?" The Prophet replied, "By Allah,
yes." The man further said, "I ask you by Allah. Has Allah ordered you to
offer five prayers in a day and night (24 hours).? He replied, "By Allah, Yes."
The man further said, "I ask you by Allah! Has Allah ordered you to observe
fasts during this month of the year (i.e. Ramadan)?" He replied, "By Allah,
Yes." The man further said, "I ask you by Allah. Has Allah ordered you to take
Zakat (obligatory charity) from our rich people and distribute it amongst our
poor people?" The Prophet replied, "By Allah, yes." Thereupon that man
said, "I have believed in all that with which you have been sent, and I have
been sent by my people as a messenger, and I am Dimam bin Tha'laba from
the brothers of Bani Sa'd bin Bakr."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 64:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abbas:
Once Allah's Apostle gave a letter to a person and ordered him to go and
deliver it to the Governor of Bahrain. (He did so) and the Governor of
Bahrain sent it to Chousroes, who read that letter and then tore it to pieces.
(The sub-narrator (Ibn Shihab) thinks that Ibn Al-Musaiyab said that Allah's
Apostle invoked Allah against them (saying), "May Allah tear them into
pieces, and disperse them all totally.)"

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 65:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Once the Prophet wrote a letter or had an idea of writing a letter. The
Prophet was told that they (rulers) would not read letters unless they were
sealed. So the Prophet got a silver ring made with "Muhammad Allah's
Apostle" engraved on it. As if I were just observing its white glitter in the
hand of the Prophet

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 66:
Narrated Abu Waqid Al-Laithi:
While Allah's Apostle was sitting in the mosque with some people, three
men came. Two of them came in front of Allah's Apostle and the third one
went away. The two persons kept on standing before Allah's Apostle for a
while and then one of them found a place in the circle and sat there while
the other sat behind the gathering, and the third one went away. When
Allah's Apostle finished his preaching, he said, "Shall I tell you about these
three persons? One of them be-took himself to Allah, so Allah took him into
His grace and mercy and accommodated him, the second felt shy from Allah,
so Allah sheltered Him in His mercy (and did not punish him), while the third
turned his face from Allah and went away, so Allah turned His face from him
likewise. "

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 67:
Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin Abi Bakra's father:
Once the Prophet was riding his camel and a man was holding its rein. The
Prophet asked, "What is the day today?" We kept quiet, thinking that he
might give that day another name. He said, "Isn't it the day of Nahr
(slaughtering of the animals of sacrifice)" We replied, "Yes." He further
asked, "Which month is this?" We again kept quiet, thinking that he might
give it another name. Then he said, "Isn't it the month of Dhul-Hijja?" We
replied, "Yes." He said, "Verily! Your blood, property and honor are sacred to
one another (i.e. Muslims) like the sanctity of this day of yours, in this month
of yours and in this city of yours. It is incumbent upon those who are present
to inform those who are absent because those who are absent might
comprehend (what I have said) better than the present audience."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 68:
Narrated Ibn Mas'ud:
The Prophet used to take care of us in preaching by selecting a suitable time,
so that we might not get bored. (He abstained from pestering us with
sermons and knowledge all the time).

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 69:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "Facilitate things to people (concerning religious matters),
and do not make it hard for them and give them good tidings and do not
make them run away (from Islam)."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 70:
Narrated Abu Wail:
'Abdullah used to give a religious talk to the people on every Thursday. Once
a man said, "O Aba 'Abdur-Rahman! (By Allah) I wish if you could preach us
daily." He replied, "The only thing which prevents me from doing so, is that I
hate to bore you, and no doubt I take care of you in preaching by selecting a
suitable time just as the Prophet used to do with us, for fear of making us
bored."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 71:
Narrated Muawiya:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "If Allah wants to do good to a person, He
makes him comprehend the religion. I am just a distributor, but the grant is
from Allah. (And remember) that this nation (true Muslims) will keep on
following Allah's teachings strictly and they will not be harmed by any one
going on a different path till Allah's order (Day of Judgment) is established."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 72:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
We were with the Prophet and a spadix of date-palm tree was brought to
him. On that he said, "Amongst the trees, there is a tree which resembles a
Muslim." I wanted to say that it was the date-palm tree but as I was the
youngest of all (of them) I kept quiet. And then the Prophet said, "It is the
date-palm tree."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 73:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud:
The Prophet said, "Do not wish to be like anyone except in two cases. (The
first is) A person, whom Allah has given wealth and he spends it righteously;
(the second is) the one whom Allah has given wisdom (the Holy Qur'an) and
he acts according to it and teaches it to others." (Fateh-al-Bari page 177 Vol.
1)

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 74:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
That he differed with Hur bin Qais bin Hisn Al-Fazari regarding the
companion of (the Prophet) Moses. Ibn 'Abbas said that he was Khadir.
Meanwhile, Ubai bin Ka'b passed by them and Ibn 'Abbas called him, saying
"My friend (Hur) and I have differed regarding Moses' companion whom
Moses, asked the way to meet. Have you heard the Prophet mentioning
something about him? He said, "Yes. I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "While
Moses was sitting in the company of some Israelites, a man came and asked
him. "Do you know anyone who is more learned than you? Moses replied:
"No." So Allah sent the Divine Inspiration to Moses: 'Yes, Our slave Khadir (is
more learned than you.)' Moses asked (Allah) how to meet him (Khadir). So
Allah made the fish as a sign for him and he was told that when the fish was
lost, he should return (to the place where he had lost it) and there he would
meet him (Al-Khadir). So Moses went on looking for the sign of the fish in
the sea. The servant-boy of Moses said to him: Do you remember when we
betook ourselves to the rock, I indeed forgot the fish, none but Satan made
me forget to remember it. On that Moses said: 'That is what we have been
seeking? (18.64) So they went back retracing their foot-steps, and found
Khadir. (And) what happened further to them is narrated in the Holy Qur'an
by Allah. (18.54 up to 18.82)

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 75:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Once the Prophet embraced me and said, "O Allah! Bestow on him the
knowledge of the Book (Qur'an)."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 76:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Once I came riding a she-ass and had (just) attained the age of puberty.
Allah's Apostle was offering the prayer at Mina. There was no wall in front of
him and I passed in front of some of the row while they were offering their
prayers. There I let the she-ass loose to graze and entered the row, and
nobody objected to it.

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 77:
Narrated Mahmud bin Rabi'a:
When I was a boy of five, I remember, the Prophet took water from a bucket
(used far getting water out of a well) with his mouth and threw it on my
face.

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 78:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
that he differed with Hur bin Qais bin Hisn Al-Fazari regarding the
companion of the Prophet Moses. Meanwhile, Ubai bin Ka'b passed by them
and Ibn 'Abbas called him saying, "My friend (Hur) and I have differed
regarding Moses' companion whom Moses asked the way to meet. Have
you heard Allah's Apostle mentioning something about him? Ubai bin Ka'b
said: "Yes, I heard the Prophet mentioning something about him (saying)
while Moses was sitting in the company of some Israelites, a man came and
asked him: "Do you know anyone who is more learned than you? Moses
replied: "No." So Allah sent the Divine Inspiration to Moses: '--Yes, Our slave
Khadir is more learned than you. Moses asked Allah how to meet him (AlKhadir). So Allah made the fish a sign for him and he was told when the fish
was lost, he should return (to the place where he had lost it) and there he
would meet him (Al-Khadir). So Moses went on looking for the sign of the
fish in the sea. The servant-boy of Moses said: 'Do you remember when we
betook ourselves to the rock, I indeed forgot the fish, none but Satan made
me forget to remember it. On that Moses said, 'That is what we have been
seeking.' So they went back retracing their footsteps, and found Kha,dir.
(and) what happened further about them is narrated in the Holy Qur'an by
Allah." (18.54 up to 18.82)

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 79:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "The example of guidance and knowledge with which
Allah has sent me is like abundant rain falling on the earth, some of which
was fertile soil that absorbed rain water and brought forth vegetation and
grass in abundance. (And) another portion of it was hard and held the rain
water and Allah benefited the people with it and they utilized it for drinking,
making their animals drink from it and for irrigation of the land for
cultivation. (And) a portion of it was barren which could neither hold the
water nor bring forth vegetation (then that land gave no benefits). The first
is the example of the person who comprehends Allah's religion and gets
benefit (from the knowledge) which Allah has revealed through me (the
Prophets and learns and then teaches others. The last example is that of a
person who does not care for it and does not take Allah's guidance revealed
through me (He is like that barren land.)"

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 80:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle said, "From among the portents of the Hour are (the
following):
1. Religious knowledge will be taken away (by the death of Religious learned
men).
2. (Religious) ignorance will prevail.
3. Drinking of Alcoholic drinks (will be very common).
4. There will be prevalence of open illegal sexual intercourse.

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 81:
Narrated Anas:
I will narrate to you a Hadith and none other than I will tell you about after
it. I heard Allah's Apostle saying: From among the portents of the Hour are
(the following):
1. Religious knowledge will decrease (by the death of religious learned men).
2. Religious ignorance will prevail.
3. There will be prevalence of open illegal sexual intercourse.
4. Women will increase in number and men will decrease in number so much
so that fifty women will be looked after by one man.

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 82:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "While I was sleeping, I saw that a cup full of milk was
brought to me and I drank my fill till I noticed (the milk) its wetness coming
out of my nails. Then I gave the remaining milk to 'Umar Ibn Al-Khattab" The
companions of the Prophet asked, "What have you interpreted (about this
dream)? "O Allah's Apostle ,!" he replied, "(It is religious) knowledge."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 83:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Amr bin Al 'Aas:
Allah's Apostle stopped (for a while near the Jimar) at Mina during his last
Hajj for the people and they were asking him questions. A man came and
said, "I forgot and got my head shaved before slaughtering the Hadi
(sacrificing animal)." The Prophet said, "There is no harm, go and do the
slaughtering now." Then another person came and said, "I forgot and
slaughtered (the camel) before Rami (throwing of the pebbles) at the
Jamra." The Prophet said, "Do the Rami now and there is no harm."
The narrator added: So on that day, when the Prophet was asked about
anything (as regards the ceremonies of Hajj) performed before or after its
due time, his reply was: "Do it (now) and there is no harm."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 84:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Somebody said to the Prophet (during his last Hajj), "I did the slaughtering
before doing the Rami.' The Prophet beckoned with his hand and said,
"There is no harm in that." Then another person said. "I got my head shaved
before offering the sacrifice." The Prophet beckoned with his hand saying,
"There is no harm in that."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 85:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "(Religious) knowledge will be taken away (by the death
of religious scholars) ignorance (in religion) and afflictions will appear; and
Harj will increase." It was asked, "What is Harj, O Allah's Apostle?" He replied
by beckoning with his hand indicating "killing." (Fateh-al-Bari Page 192, Vol.
1)

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 86:
Narrated Asma:
I came to 'Aisha while she was praying, and said to her, "What has happened
to the people?" She pointed out towards the sky. (I looked towards the
mosque), and saw the people offering the prayer. Aisha said, "Subhan
Allah." I said to her, "Is there a sign?" She nodded with her head meaning,
"Yes." I, too, then stood (for the prayer of eclipse) till I became (nearly)
unconscious and later on I poured water on my head. After the prayer, the
Prophet praised and glorified Allah and then said,
"Just now at this place I have seen what I have never seen before, including
Paradise and Hell. No doubt it has been inspired to me that you will be put
to trials in your graves and these trials will be like the trials of Masiah-adDajjal or nearly like it (the sub narrator is not sure which expression Asma'
used). You will be asked, 'What do you know about this man (the Prophet
Muhammad)?' Then the faithful believer (or Asma' said a similar word) will
reply, 'He is Muhammad Allah's Apostle who had come to us with clear
evidences and guidance and so we accepted his teachings and followed him.
And he is Muhammad.' And he will repeat it thrice. Then the angels will say
to him, 'Sleep in peace as we have come to know that you were a faithful
believer.' On the other hand, a hypocrite or a doubtful person will reply, 'I
do not know, but I heard the people saying something and so I said it.' (the
same). "

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 87:
Narrated Abu Jamra:
I was an interpreter between the people and Ibn 'Abbas. Once Ibn 'Abbas
said that a delegation of the tribe of'Abdul Qais came to the Prophet who
asked them, "Who are the people (i.e. you)? (Or) who are the delegates?"
They replied, "We are from the tribe of Rabi'a." Then the Prophet said to
them, "Welcome, O people (or said, "O delegation (of 'Abdul Qais).")
Neither will you have disgrace nor will you regret." They said, "We have
come to you from a distant place and there is the tribe of the infidels of
Mudar intervening between you and us and we cannot come to you except
in the sacred month. So please order us to do something good (religious
deeds) and that we may also inform our people whom we have left behind
(at home) and that we may enter Paradise (by acting on them.)" The
Prophet ordered them to do four things, and forbade them from four
things. He ordered them to believe in Allah Alone, the Honorable the
Majestic and said to them, "Do you know what is meant by believing in Allah
Alone?" They replied, "Allah and His Apostle know better." Thereupon the
Prophet said, "(That means to testify that none has the right to be
worshipped but Allah and that Muhammad is His Apostle, to offer prayers
perfectly, to pay Zakat, to observe fasts during the month of Ramadan,
(and) to pay Al-Khumus (one fifth of the booty to be given in Allah's cause)."
Then he forbade them four things, namely Ad-Dubba.' Hantam, Muzaffat
(and) An-Naqir or Muqaiyar(These were the names of pots in which
alcoholic drinks used to be prepared). The Prophet further said, "Memorize
them (these instructions) and tell them to the people whom you have left
behind."
Volume 1, Book 3, Number 88:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Mulaika:
'Uqba bin Al-Harith said that he had married the daughter of Abi Ihab bin
'Aziz. Later on a woman came to him and said, "I have suckled (nursed)
Uqba and the woman whom he married (his wife) at my breast." 'Uqba said
to her, "Neither I knew that you have suckled (nursed) me nor did you tell
me." Then he rode over to see Allah's Apostle at Medina, and asked him
about it. Allah's Apostle said, "How can you keep her as a wife when it has
been said (that she is your foster-sister)?" Then Uqba divorced her, and she
married another man.

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 89:
Narrated 'Umar:
My Ansari neighbor from Bani Umaiya bin Zaid who used to live at 'Awali AlMedina and used to visit the Prophet by turns. He used to go one day and I
another day. When I went I used to bring the news of that day regarding the
Divine Inspiration and other things, and when he went, he used to do the
same for me. Once my Ansari friend, in his turn (on returning from the
Prophet), knocked violently at my door and asked if I was there." I became
horrified and came out to him. He said, "Today a great thing has happened."
I then went to Hafsa and saw her weeping. I asked her, "Did Allah's Apostle
divorce you all?" She replied, "I do not know." Then, I entered upon the
Prophet and said while standing, "Have you divorced your wives?" The
Prophet replied in the negative. On what I said, "Allahu-Akbar (Allah is
Greater)." (See Hadith No. 119, Vol. 3 for details)

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 90:
Narrated Abu Mas'ud Al-Ansari:
Once a man said to Allah's Apostle "O Allah's Apostle! I may not attend the
(compulsory congregational) prayer because so and so (the Imam) prolongs
the prayer when he leads us for it. The narrator added: "I never saw the
Prophet more furious in giving advice than he was on that day. The Prophet
said, "O people! Some of you make others dislike good deeds (the prayers).
So whoever leads the people in prayer should shorten it because among
them there are the sick the weak and the needy (having some jobs to do)."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 91:
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani:
A man asked the Prophet about the picking up of a "Luqata" (fallen lost
thing). The Prophet replied, "Recognize and remember its tying material and
its container, and make public announcement (about it) for one year, then
utilize it but give it to its owner if he comes." Then the person asked about
the lost camel. On that, the Prophet got angry and his cheeks or his Face
became red and he said, "You have no concern with it as it has its water
container, and its feet and it will reach water, and eat (the leaves) of trees
till its owner finds it." The man then asked about the lost sheep. The
Prophet replied, "It is either for you, for your brother (another person) or
for the wolf."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 92:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet was asked about things which he did not like, but when the
questioners insisted, the Prophet got angry. He then said to the people,
"Ask me anything you like." A man asked, "Who is my father?" The Prophet
replied, "Your father is Hudhafa." Then another man got up and said, "Who
is my father, O Allah's Apostle ?" He replied, "Your father is Salim, Maula
(the freed slave) of Shaiba." So when 'Umar saw that (the anger) on the
face of the Prophet he said, "O Allah's Apostle! We repent to Allah (Our
offending you)."
Volume 1, Book 3, Number 93:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
One day Allah's Apostle came out (before the people) and 'Abdullah bin
Hudhafa stood up and asked (him) "Who is my father?" The Prophet replied,
"Your father is Hudhafa." The Prophet told them repeatedly (in anger) to
ask him anything they liked. 'Umar knelt down before the Prophet and said
thrice, "We accept Allah as (our) Lord and Islam as (our) religion and
Muhammad as (our) Prophet." After that the Prophet became silent.

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 94:
Narrated Anas:
Whenever the Prophet asked permission to enter, he knocked the door
thrice with greeting and whenever he spoke a sentence (said a thing) he
used to repeat it thrice. (See Hadith No. 261, Vol. 8).

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 95:
Narrated Anas:
Whenever the Prophet spoke a sentence (said a thing), he used to repeat it
thrice so that the people could understand it properly from him and
whenever he asked permission to enter, (he knocked the door) thrice with
greeting.

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 96:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
Once Allah's Apostle remained behind us in a journey. He joined us while we
were performing ablution for the 'Asr prayer which was over-due. We were
just passing wet hands over our feet (not washing them properly) so the
Prophet addressed us in a loud voice and said twice or thrice, "Save your
heels from the fire."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 97:
Narrated Abu Burda's father:
Allah's Apostle said "Three persons will have a double reward:
1. A Person from the people of the scriptures who believed in his prophet
(Jesus or Moses) and then believed in the Prophet Muhammad (i .e. has
embraced Islam).
2. A slave who discharges his duties to Allah and his master.
3. A master of a woman-slave who teaches her good manners and educates
her in the best possible way (the religion) and manumits her and then
marries her."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 97g:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Once Allah's Apostle came out while Bilal was accompanying him. He went
towards the women thinking that they had not heard him (i.e. his sermon).
So he preached them and ordered them to pay alms. (Hearing that) the
women started giving alms; some donated their ear-rings, some gave their
rings and Bilal was collecting them in the corner of his garment.

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 98:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I said: "O Allah's Apostle! Who will be the luckiest person, who will gain your
intercession on the Day of Resurrection?" Allah's Apostle said: O Abu
Huraira! "I have thought that none will ask me about it before you as I know
your longing for the (learning of) Hadiths. The luckiest person who will hav
my intercession on the Day of Resurrection will be the one who said
sincerely from the bottom of his heart "None has the right to be worshipped
but Allah."
And 'Umar bin 'Abdul 'Aziz wrote to Abu Bakr bin Hazm, "Look for the
knowledge of Hadith and get it written, as I am afraid that religious
knowledge will vanish and the religious learned men will pass away (die). Do
not accept anything save the Hadiths of the Prophet. Circulate knowledge
and teach the ignorant, for knowledge does not vanish except when it is
kept secretly (to oneself)."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 99:
Narrated Abdullah Ibn Dinar:
also narrates the same (above-mentioned statement) as has been narrated
by 'Umar bin 'Abdul 'Aziz up to "The religious scholar (learned men) will
pass away (die)."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 100:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al' As:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Allah does not take away the knowledge, by
taking it away from (the hearts of) the people, but takes it away by the
death of the religious learned men till when none of the (religious learned
men) remains, people will take as their leaders ignorant persons who when
consulted will give their verdict without knowledge. So they will go astray
and will lead the people astray."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 101:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Some women requested the Prophet to fix a day for them as the men were
taking all his time. On that he promised them one day for religious lessons
and commandments. Once during such a lesson the Prophet said, "A woman
whose three children die will be shielded by them from the Hell fire." On
that a woman asked, "If only two die?" He replied, "Even two (will shield her
from the Hell-fire)."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 102:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
as above (the sub narrators are different). Abu Huraira qualified the three
children referred to in the above mentioned Hadith as not having reached
the age of committing sins (i.e. age of puberty) .

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 103:
Narrated Ibn Abu Mulaika:
Whenever 'Aisha (the wife of the Prophet) heard anything which she did not
understand, she used to ask again till she understood it completely. Aisha
said: "Once the Prophet said, "Whoever will be called to account (about his
deeds on the Day of Resurrection) will surely be punished." I said, "Doesn't
Allah say: "He surely will receive an easy reckoning." (84.8) The Prophet
replied, "This means only the presentation of the accounts but whoever will
be argued about his account, will certainly be ruined."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 104:
Narrated Said:
Abu Shuraih said, "When 'Amr bin Said was sending the troops to Mecca (to
fight 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair) I said to him, 'O chief! Allow me to tell you
what the Prophet said on the day following the conquests of Mecca. My
ears heard and my heart comprehended, and I saw him with my own eyes,
when he said it. He glorified and praised Allah and then said, "Allah and not
the people has made Mecca a sanctuary. So anybody who has belief in Allah
and the Last Day (i.e. a Muslim) should neither shed blood in it nor cut down
its trees. If anybody argues that fighting is allowed in Mecca as Allah's
Apostle did fight (in Mecca), tell him that Allah gave permission to His
Apostle, but He did not give it to you. The Prophet added: Allah allowed me
only for a few hours on that day (of the conquest) and today (now) its
sanctity is the same (valid) as it was before. So it is incumbent upon those
who are present to convey it (this information) to those who are absent."
Abu- Shuraih was asked, "What did 'Amr reply?" He said 'Amr said, "O Abu
Shuraih! I know better than you (in this respect). Mecca does not give
protection to one who disobeys (Allah) or runs after committing murder, or
theft (and takes refuge in Mecca).

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 105:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
The Prophet said. No doubt your blood, property, the sub-narrator
Muhammad thought that Abu Bakra had also mentioned and your honor
(chastity), are sacred to one another as is the sanctity of this day of yours in
this month of yours. It is incumbent on those who are present to inform
those who are absent." (Muhammad the Subnarrator used to say, "Allah's
Apostle told the truth.") The Prophet repeated twice: "No doubt! Haven't I
conveyed Allah's message to you.

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 106:
Narrated 'Ali:
The Prophet said, "Do not tell a lie against me for whoever tells a lie against
me (intentionally) then he will surely enter the Hell-fire."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 107:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair:
I said to my father, 'I do not hear from you any narration (Hadith) of Allah s
Apostle as I hear (his narrations) from so and so?" Az-Zubair replied. l was
always with him (the Prophet) and I heard him saying "Whoever tells a lie
against me (intentionally) then (surely) let him occupy, his seat in Hell-fire.

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 108:
Narrated Anas:
The fact which stops me from narrating a great number of Hadiths to you is
that the Prophet said: "Whoever tells a lie against me intentionally, then
(surely) let him occupy his seat in Hell-fire."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 109:
Narrated Salama:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Whoever (intentionally) ascribes to me what I
have not said then (surely) let him occupy his seat in Hell-fire."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 110:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Name yourselves with my name (use my name) but do
not name yourselves with my Kunya name (i.e. Abu-l Qasim). And whoever
sees me in a dream then surely he has seen me for Satan cannot
impersonate me. And whoever tells a lie against me (intentionally), then
(surely) let him occupy his seat in Hell-fire."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 111:
Narrated Ash-Sha'bi:
Abu Juhaifa said, "I asked Ali, 'Have you got any book (which has been
revealed to the Prophet apart from the Qur'an)?' 'Ali replied, 'No, except
Allah's Book or the power of understanding which has been bestowed (by
Allah) upon a Muslim or what is (written) in this sheet of paper (with me).'
Abu Juhaifa said, "I asked, 'What is (written) in this sheet of paper?' Ali
replied, it deals with The Diyya (compensation (blood money) paid by the
killer to the relatives of the victim), the ransom for the releasing of the
captives from the hands of the enemies, and the law that no Muslim should
be killed in Qisas (equality in punishment) for the killing of (a disbeliever).

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 112:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
In the year of the Conquest of Mecca, the tribe of Khuza'a killed a man from
the tribe of Bani Laith in revenge for a killed person, belonging to them.
They informed the Prophet about it. So he rode his Rahila (she-camel for
riding) and addressed the people saying, "Allah held back the killing from
Mecca. (The sub-narrator is in doubt whether the Prophet said "elephant or
killing," as the Arabic words standing for these words have great similarity in
shape), but He (Allah) let His Apostle and the believers over power the
infidels of Mecca. Beware! (Mecca is a sanctuary) Verily! Fighting in Mecca
was not permitted for anyone before me nor will it be permitted for anyone
after me. It (war) in it was made legal for me for few hours or so on that
day. No doubt it is at this moment a sanctuary, it is not allowed to uproot its
thorny shrubs or to uproot its trees or to pick up its Luqatt (fallen things)
except by a person who will look for its owner (announce it publicly). And if
somebody is killed, then his closest relative has the right to choose one of
the two-- the blood money (Diyya) or retaliation having the killer killed. In
the meantime a man from Yemen came and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Get
that written for me." The Prophet ordered his companions to write that for
him. Then a man from Quraish said, "Except Al-Iqhkhir (a type of grass that
has good smell) O Allah's Apostle, as we use it in our houses and graves."
The Prophet said, "Except Al-Idhkhiri.e. Al-Idhkhir is allowed to be plucked."
Volume 1, Book 3, Number 113:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
There is none among the companions of the Prophet who has narrated
more Hadiths than I except 'Abdallah bin Amr (bin Al-'As) who used to write
them and I never did the same.

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 114:
Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah:
Ibn 'Abbas said, "When the ailment of the Prophet became worse, he said,
'Bring for me (writing) paper and I will write for you a statement after which
you will not go astray.' But 'Umar said, 'The Prophet is seriously ill, and we
have got Allah's Book with us and that is sufficient for us.' But the
companions of the Prophet differed about this and there was a hue and cry.
On that the Prophet said to them, 'Go away (and leave me alone). It is not
right that you should quarrel in front of me." Ibn 'Abbas came out saying, "It
was most unfortunate (a great disaster) that Allah's Apostle was prevented
from writing that statement for them because of their disagreement and
noise. (Note: It is apparent from this Hadith that Ibn 'Abbes had witnessed
the event and came out saying this statement. The truth is not so, for Ibn
'Abbas used to say this statement on narrating the Hadith and he had not
witnessed the event personally. See Fath Al-Bari Vol. 1, p.220 footnote.) (See
Hadith No. 228, Vol. 4).

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 115:
Narrated Um Salama:
One night Allah's Apostle got up and said, "Subhan Allah! How many
afflictions have been descended tonight and how many treasures have been
disclosed! Go and wake the sleeping lady occupants of these dwellings (his
wives) up (for prayers). A well-dressed (soul) in this world may be naked in
the Hereafter. "
Volume 1, Book 3, Number 116:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Once the Prophet led us in the 'Isha' prayer during the last days of his life
and after finishing it (the prayer) (with Taslim) he said: "Do you realize (the
importance of) this night?" Nobody present on the surface of the earth
tonight will be living after the completion of one hundred years from this
night."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 117:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
I stayed overnight in the house of my aunt Maimuna bint Al-Harith (the wife
of the Prophet ) while the Prophet was there with her during her night turn.
The Prophet offered the 'Isha' prayer (in the mosque), returned home and
after having prayed four Rakat, he slept. Later on he got up at night and
then asked whether the boy (or he used a similar word) had slept? Then he
got up for the prayer and I stood up by his left side but he made me stand to
his right and offered five Rakat followed by two more Rakat. Then he slept
and I heard him snoring and then (after a while) he left for the (Fajr) prayer.

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 118:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
People say that I have narrated many Hadiths (The Prophet's narrations).
Had it not been for two verses in the Qur'an, I would not have narrated a
single Hadith, and the verses are:
"Verily those who conceal the clear sign and the guidance which We have
sent down . . . (up to) Most Merciful." (2:159-160). And no doubt our Muhajir
(emigrant) brothers used to be busy in the market with their business
(bargains) and our Ansari brothers used to be busy with their property
(agriculture). But I (Abu Huraira) used to stick to Allah's Apostle contented
with what will fill my stomach and I used to attend that which they used not
to attend and I used to memorize that which they used not to memorize.

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 119:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I said to Allah's Apostle "I hear many narrations (Hadiths) from you but I
forget them." Allah's Apostle said, "Spread your Rida' (garment)." I did
accordingly and then he moved his hands as if filling them with something
(and emptied them in my Rida') and then said, "Take and wrap this sheet
over your body." I did it and after that I never forgot any thing.

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 120:
Narrated Ibrahim bin Al-Mundhir:
Ibn Abi Fudaik narrated the same as above (Hadith...119) but added that the
Prophet had moved his hands as if filling them with something and then he
emptied them in the Rida' of Abu Huraira.

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 121:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I have memorized two kinds of knowledge from Allah's Apostle . I have
propagated one of them to you and if I propagated the second, then my
pharynx (throat) would be cut (i.e. killed).

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 122:
Narrated Jarir:
The Prophet said to me during Hajjat-al-Wida': Let the people keep quiet and
listen. Then he said (addressing the people), "Do not (become infidels)
revert to disbelief after me by striking the necks (cutting the throats) of one
another (killing each other)."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 123:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
I said to Ibn 'Abbas, "Nauf-Al-Bakali claims that Moses (the companion of
Khadir) was not the Moses of Bani Israel but he was another Moses." Ibn
'Abbas remarked that the enemy of Allah (Nauf) was a liar.

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 124:
Narrated Ubai bin Ka'b:
The Prophet said, "Once the Prophet Moses stood up and addressed Bani
Israel. He was asked, "Who is the most learned man amongst the people. He
said, "I am the most learned." Allah admonished Moses as he did not
attribute absolute knowledge to Him (Allah). So Allah inspired to him "At
the junction of the two seas there is a slave amongst my slaves who is more
learned than you." Moses said, "O my Lord! How can I meet him?" Allah said:
Take a fish in a large basket (and proceed) and you will find him at the place
where you will lose the fish. So Moses set out along with his (servant) boy,
Yusha' bin Nuin and carried a fish in a large basket till they reached a rock,
where they laid their heads (i.e. lay down) and slept. The fish came out of
the basket and it took its way into the sea as in a tunnel. So it was an
amazing thing for both Moses and his (servant) boy. They proceeded for the
rest of that night and the following day. When the day broke, Moses said to
his (servant) boy: "Bring us our early meal. No doubt, we have suffered
much fatigue in this journey." Moses did not get tired till he passed the place
about which he was told. There the (servant) boy told Moses, "Do you
remember when we betook ourselves to the rock, I indeed forgot the fish."
Moses remarked, "That is what we have been seeking. So they went back
retracing their foot-steps, till they reached the rock. There they saw a man
covered with a garment (or covering himself with his own garment). Moses
greeted him. Al-Khadir replied saying, "How do people greet each other in
your land?" Moses said, "I am Moses." He asked, "The Moses of Bani Israel?"
Moses replied in the affirmative and added, "May I follow you so that you
teach me of that knowledge which you have been taught." Al-Khadir replied,
"Verily! You will not be able to remain patient with me, O Moses! I have
some of the knowledge of Allah which He has taught me and which you do
not know, while you have some knowledge which Allah has taught you
which I do not know." Moses said, "Allah willing, you will find me patient
and I will not disobey you in aught. So both of them set out walking along
the sea-shore, as they did not have a boat. In the meantime a boat passed by
them and they requested the crew of the boat to take them on board. The
crew recognized Al-Khadir and took them on board without fare. Then a
sparrow came and stood on the edge of the boat and dipped its beak once
or twice in the sea. Al-Khadir said: "O Moses! My knowledge and your
knowledge have not decreased Allah's knowledge except as much as this
sparrow has decreased the water of the sea with its beak." Al-Khadir went
to one of the planks of the boat and plucked it out. Moses said, "These
people gave us a free lift but you have broken their boat and scuttled it so as
to drown its people." Al-Khadir replied, "Didn't I tell you that you will not be
able to remain patient with me." Moses said, "Call me not to account for
what I forgot." The first (excuse) of Moses was that he had forgotten. Then
they proceeded further and found a boy playing with other boys. Al-Khadir
took hold of the boy's head from the top and plucked it out with his hands
(i.e. killed him). Moses said, "Have you killed an innocent soul who has killed
none." Al-Kha,dir replied, "Did I not tell you that you cannot remain patient
with me?" Then they both proceeded till when they came to the people of a
town, they asked them for food, but they refused to entertain them. Then
they found there a wall on the point of collapsing. Al-Khadir repaired it with
his own hands. Moses said, "If you had wished, surely you could have taken
wages for it." Al-Khadir replied, "This is the parting between you and me."
The Prophet added, "May Allah be Merciful to Moses! Would that he could
have been more patient to learn more about his story with Al-Khadir. "
Volume 1, Book 3, Number 125:
Narrated Abu Musa:
A man came to the Prophet and asked, "O Allah's Apostle! What kind of
fighting is in Allah's cause? (I ask this), for some of us fight because of being
enraged and angry and some for the sake of his pride and haughtiness." The
Prophet raised his head (as the questioner was standing) and said, "He who
fights so that Allah's Word (Islam) should be superior, then he fights in
Allah's cause."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 126:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amar:
I saw the Prophet near the Jamra and the people were asking him questions
(about religious problems). A man asked, "O Allah's Apostle! I have
slaughtered the Hadi (animal) before doing the Rami." The Prophet replied,
"Do the Rami (now) and there is no harm." Another person asked, "O Allah's
Apostle! I got my head shaved before slaughtering the animal." The Prophet
replied, "Do the slaughtering (now) and there is no harm." So on that day,
when the Prophet was asked about anything as regards the ceremonies of
Hajj performed before or after its due time his reply was, "Do it (now) and
there is no harm."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 127:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
While I was going with the Prophet through the ruins of Medina and he was
reclining on a date-palm leaf stalk, some Jews passed by. Some of them said
to the others: Ask him (the Prophet) about the spirit. Some of them said
that they should not ask him that question as he might give a reply which
would displease them. But some of them insisted on asking, and so one of
them stood up and asked, "O Aba-l-Qasim ! What is the spirit?" The Prophet
remained quiet. I thought he was being inspired Divinely. So I stayed till that
state of the Prophet (while being inspired) was over. The Prophet then said,
"And they ask you (O Muhammad) concerning the spirit --Say: The spirit -- its
knowledge is with my Lord. And of knowledge you (mankind) have been
given only a little)." (17.85)

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 128:
Narrated Aswad:
Ibn Az-Zubair said to me, "Aisha used to tell you secretly a number of things.
What did she tell you about the Ka'ba?" I replied, "She told me that once the
Prophet said, 'O 'Aisha! Had not your people been still close to the preIslamic period of ignorance (infidelity)! I would have dismantled the Ka'ba
and would have made two doors in it; one for entrance and the other for
exit." Later on Ibn Az-Zubair did the same.

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 129:
Narrated Abu At-Tufail:
the above mentioned Statement of 'Ali.

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 130:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
"Once Mu'adh was along with Allah's Apostle as a companion rider. Allah's
Apostle said, "O Mu'adh bin Jabal." Mu'adh replied, "Labbaik and Sa'daik. O
Allah's Apostle!" Again the Prophet said, "O Mu'adh!" Mu'adh said thrice,
"Labbaik and Sa'daik, O Allah's Apostle!" Allah's Apostle said, "There is none
who testifies sincerely that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah
and Muhammad is his Apostle, except that Allah, will save him from the Hellfire." Mu'adh said, "O Allah's Apostle ! Should I not inform the people about
it so that they may have glad tidings?" He replied, "When the people hear
about it, they will solely depend on it." Then Mu'adh narrated the above-
mentioned Hadith just before his death, being afraid of committing sin (by
not telling the knowledge).

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 131:
Narrated Anas:
I was informed that the Prophet had said to Mu'adh, "Whosoever will meet
Allah without associating anything in worship with Him will go to Paradise."
Mu'adh asked the Prophet, "Should I not inform the people of this good
news?" The Prophet replied, "No, I am afraid, lest they should depend upon
it (absolutely)."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 132:
Narrated Um Salama:
Um-Sulaim came to Allah's Apostle and said, "Verily, Allah is not shy of
(telling you) the truth. Is it necessary for a woman to take a bath after she
has a wet dream (nocturnal sexual discharge?) The Prophet replied, "Yes, if
she notices a discharge." Um Salama, then covered her face and asked, "O
Allah's Apostle! Does a woman get a discharge?" He replied, "Yes, let your
right hand be in dust (An Arabic expression you say to a person when you
contradict his statement meaning "you will not achieve goodness"), and
that is why the son resembles his mother."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 133:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Once Allah's Apostle said, "Amongst the trees there is a tree, the leaves of
which do not fall and is like a Muslim, tell me the name of that tree."
Everybody started thinking about the trees of the desert areas and I thought
of the date-palm tree but felt shy (to answer). The others asked, "O Allah's
Apostle! inform us of it." He replied, "it is the date-palm tree." I told my
father what had come to my mind and on that he said, "Had you said it I
would have preferred it to such and such a thing that I might possess."

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 134:
Narrated 'Ali:
I used to get the emotional urethral discharge frequently so I requested AlMiqdad to ask the Prophet about it. Al-Miqdad asked him and he replied,
"One has to perform ablution (after it)." (See Hadith No. 269).

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 135:
Narrated Nafi:
'Abdullah bin 'Umar said: "A man got up in the mosque and said: O Allah's
Apostle 'At which place you order us that we should assume the Ihram?'
Allah's Apostle replied, 'The residents of Medina should assure the Ihram
from Dhil-Hulaifa, the people of Syria from Al-Ju,hfa and the people of Najd
from Qarn." Ibn 'Umar further said, "The people consider that Allah's
Apostle had also said, 'The residents of Yemen should assume Ihram from
Yalamlam.' " Ibn 'Umar used to say, "I do not: remember whether Allah's
Apostle had said the last statement or not?"

Volume 1, Book 3, Number 136:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
A man asked the Prophet : "What (kinds of clothes) should a Muhrim (a
Muslim intending to perform 'Umra or Hajj) wear? He replied, "He should
not wear a shirt, a turban, trousers, a head cloak or garment scented with
saffron or Wars (kinds of perfumes). And if he has slippers, then he can use
Khuffs (leather socks) but the socks should be cut short so as to make the
ankles bare." (See Hadith No. 615, Vol. 2).


BOOK 4. ABLUTIONS (WUDU') (137-247)

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 137:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The prayer of a person who does ,Hadath (passes,
urine, stool or wind) is not accepted till he performs (repeats) the ablution."
A person from Hadaramout asked Abu Huraira, "What is 'Hadath'?" Abu
Huraira replied, " 'Hadath' means the passing of wind from the anus."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 138:
Narrated Nu'am Al-Mujmir:
Once I went up the roof of the mosque, along with Abu Huraira. He perform
ablution and said, "I heard the Prophet saying, "On the Day of Resurrection,
my followers will be called "Al-Ghurr-ul-Muhajjalun" from the trace of
ablution and whoever can increase the area of his radiance should do so (i.e.
by performing ablution regularly).' "

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 139:
Narrated 'Abbas bin Tamim:
My uncle asked Allah's Apostle about a person who imagined to have
passed wind during the prayer. Allah' Apostle replied: "He should not leave
his prayers unless he hears sound or smells something."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 140:
Narrated Kuraib:
Ibn 'Abbas said, "The Prophet slept till he snored and then prayed (or
probably lay till his breath sounds were heard and then got up and prayed)."
Ibn 'Abbas added: "I stayed overnight in the house of my aunt, Maimuna,
the Prophet slept for a part of the night, (See Fateh-al-Bari page 249, Vol. 1),
and late in the night, he got up and performed ablution from a hanging
water skin, a light (perfect) ablution and stood up for the prayer. I, too,
performed a similar ablution, then I went and stood on his left. He drew me
to his right and prayed as much as Allah wished, and again lay and slept till
his breath sounds were heard. Later on the Mua'dhdhin (callmaker for the
prayer) came to him and informed him that it was time for Prayer. The
Prophet went with him for the prayer without performing a new ablution."
(Sufyan said to 'Amr that some people said, "The eyes of Allah's Apostle
sleep but his heart does not sleep." 'Amr replied, "I heard 'Ubaid bin 'Umar
saying that the dreams of Prophets were Divine Inspiration, and then he
recited the verse: 'I (Abraham) see in a dream, (O my son) that I offer you in
sacrifice (to Allah)." (37.102) (See Hadith No. 183)

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 141:
Narrated Usama bin Zaid:
Allah's Apostle proceeded from 'Arafat till when he reached the mountain
pass, he dismounted, urinated and then performed ablution but not a
perfect one. I said to him, ("Is it the time for) the prayer, O Allah's Apostle?"
He said, "The (place of) prayer is ahead of you." He rode till when he
reached Al-Muzdalifa, he dismounted and performed ablution and a perfect
one, The (call for) Iqama was pronounced and he led the Maghrib prayer.
Then everybody made his camel kneel down at its place. Then the Iqama
was pronounced for the 'Isha' prayer which the Prophet led and no prayer
was offered in between the two . prayers ('Isha' and Maghrib).

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 142:
Narrated 'Ata' bin Yasar:
Ibn 'Abbas performed ablution and washed his face (in the following way):
He ladled out a handful of water, rinsed his mouth and washed his nose with
it by putting in water and then blowing it out. He then, took another handful
(of water) and did like this (gesturing) joining both hands, and washed his
face, took another handful of water and washed his right forearm. He again
took another handful of water and washed his left forearm, and passed wet
hands over his head and took another handful of water and poured it over
his right foot (up to his ankles) and washed it thoroughly and similarly took
another handful of water and washed thoroughly his left foot (up to the
ankles) and said, "I saw Allah's Apostle performing ablution in this way."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 143:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "If anyone of you on having sexual relations with his wife
said (and he must say it before starting) 'In the name of Allah. O Allah!
Protect us from Satan and also protect what you bestow upon us (i.e. the
coming offspring) from Satan, and if it is destined that they should have a
child then, Satan will never be able to harm that offspring."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 144:
Narrated Anas:
Whenever the Prophet went to answer the call of nature, he used to say,
"Allah-umma inni a'udhu bika minal khubuthi wal khaba'ith i.e. O Allah, I
seek Refuge with You from all offensive and wicked things (evil deeds and
evil spirits)."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 145:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Once the Prophet entered a lavatory and I placed water for his ablution. He
asked, "Who placed it?" He was informed accordingly and so he said, "O
Allah! Make him (Ibn 'Abbas) a learned scholar in religion (Islam)."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 146:
Narrated Abu Aiyub Al-Ansari:
Allah's Apostle said, "If anyone of you goes to an open space for answering
the call of nature he should neither face nor turn his back towards the Qibla;
he should either face the east or the west."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 147:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
People say, "Whenever you sit for answering the call of nature, you should
not face the Qibla or Bait-ulMaqdis (Jerusalem)." I told them. "Once I went
up the roof of our house and I saw Allah's Apostle answering the call of
nature while sitting on two bricks facing Bait-ul-Maqdis (Jerusalem) (but
there was a screen covering him. ' (FatehAl-Bari, Page 258, Vol. 1).

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 148:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The wives of the Prophet used to go to Al-Manasi, a vast open place (near
Baqia at Medina) to answer the call of nature at night. 'Umar used to say to
the Prophet "Let your wives be veiled," but Allah's Apostle did not do so.
One night Sauda bint Zam'a the wife of the Prophet went out at 'Isha' time
and she was a tall lady. 'Umar addressed her and said, "I have recognized
you, O Sauda." He said so, as he desired eagerly that the verses of Al-Hijab
(the observing of veils by the Muslim women) may be revealed. So Allah
revealed the verses of "Al-Hijab" (A complete body cover excluding the
eyes).
Volume 1, Book 4, Number 149:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said to his wives, "You are allowed to go out to answer the call
of nature. "

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 150:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
I went up to the roof of Hafsa's house for some job and I saw Allah's Apostle
answering the call of nature facing Sham (Syria, Jordan, Palestine and
Lebanon regarded as one country) with his back towards the Qibla. (See
Hadith No. 147).

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 151:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Once I went up the roof of our house and saw Allah's Apostle answering the
call of nature while sitting over two bricks facing Bait-ul-Maqdis (Jerusalem).
(See Hadith No. 147).

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 152:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Whenever Allah's Apostle went to answer the call of nature, I along with
another boy used to accompany him with a tumbler full of water. (Hisham
commented, "So that he might wash his private parts with it.)"

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 153:
Narrated Anas:
Whenever Allah's Apostle went to answer the call of nature, I along with
another boy from us used to go behind him with a tumbler full of water.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 154:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Whenever Allah's Apostle went to answer the call of nature, I along with
another boy used to carry a tumbler full of water (for cleaning the private
parts) and an 'Anza (spear-headed stuck).

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 155:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whenever anyone of you drinks water, he should not
breathe in the drinking utensil, and whenever anyone of you goes to a
lavatory, he should neither touch his penis nor clean his private parts with
his right hand."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 156:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
The Prophet said, "Whenever anyone of you makes water he should not
hold his penis or clean his private parts with his right hand. (And while
drinking) one should not breathe in the drinking utensil ."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 157:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I followed the Prophet while he was going out to answer the call of nature.
He used not to look this way or that. So, when I approached near him he
said to me, "Fetch for me some stones for ' cleaning the privates parts (or
said something similar), and do not bring a bone or a piece of dung." So I
brought the stones in the corner of my garment and placed them by his side
and I then went away from him. When he finished (from answering the call
of nature) he used, them .

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 158:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet went out to answer the call of nature and asked me to bring
three stones. I found two stones and searched for the third but could not
find it. So took a dried piece of dung and brought it to him. He took the two
stones and threw away the dung and said, "This is a filthy thing."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 159:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet performed ablution by washing the body parts only once.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 160:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid:
The Prophet performed ablution by washing the body parts twice.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 161:
Narrated Humran:
(the slave of 'Uthman) I saw 'Uthman bin 'Affan asking for a tumbler of
water (and when it was brought) he poured water over his hands and
washed them thrice and then put his right hand in the water container and
rinsed his mouth, washed his nose by putting water in it and then blowing it
out. then he washed his face and forearrlns up to the elbows thrice, passed
his wet hands over his head and washed his feet up to the ankles thrice.
Then he said, "Allah's Apostle said 'If anyone Performs ablution like that of
mine and offers a two-rak'at prayer during which he does not think of
anything else (not related to the present prayer) then his past sins will be
forgiven.' " After performing the ablution 'Uthman said, "I am going to tell
you a Hadith which I would not have told you, had I not been compelled by a
certain Holy Verse (the sub narrator 'Urwa said: This verse is: "Verily, those
who conceal the clear signs and the guidance which we have sent down...)"
(2:159). I heard the Prophet saying, 'If a man performs ablution perfectly and
then offers the compulsory congregational prayer, Allah will forgive his sins
committed between that (prayer) and the (next) prayer till he offers it.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 162:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Whoever performs ablution should clean his nose with
water by putting the water in it and then blowing it out, and whoever cleans
his private parts with stones should do it with odd number of stones."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 163:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If anyone of you performs ablution he should put
water in his nose and then blow it out and whoever cleans his private parts
with stones should do so with odd numbers. And whoever wakes up from
his sleep should wash his hands before putting them in the water for
ablution, because nobody knows where his hands were during sleep."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 164:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
The Prophet remained behind us on a journey. He joined us while we were
performing ablution for the 'Asr prayer which was over-due and we were
just passing wet hands over our feet (not washing them thoroughly) so he
addressed us in a loud voice saying twice orthriae, "Save your heels from the
fire."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 165:
Narrated Humran:
(the freed slave of 'Uthman bin 'Affan) I saw 'Uthman bin 'Affan asking (for
a tumbler of water) to perform ablution (and when it was brought) he
poured water from it over his hands and washed them thrice and then put
his right hand in the water container and rinsed his mouth and washed his
nose by putting water in it and then blowing it out. Then he washed his face
thrice and (then) forearms up to the elbows thrice, then passed his wet
hands over his head and then washed each foot thrice. After that 'Uthman
said, "I saw the Prophet performing ablution like this of mine, and he said, 'If
anyone performs ablution like that of mine and offers a two-rak'at prayer
during which he does not think of anything else (not related to the present
prayer) then his past sins will be forgiven. '

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 166:
Narrated Muhammad Ibn Ziyad:
I heard Abu Huraira saying as he passed by us while the people were
performing ablution from a utensil containing water, "Perform ablution
perfectly and thoroughly for Abul-Qasim (the Prophet) said, 'Save your heels
from the Hell-fire.' "

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 167:
Narrated 'Ubaid Ibn Juraij:
I asked 'Abdullah bin 'Umar, "O Abu 'Abdur-Rahman! I saw you doing four
things which I never saw being done by anyone of you companions?"
'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "What are those, O Ibn Juraij?" I said, "I never saw
you touching any corner of the Ka'ba except these (two) facing south
(Yemen) and I saw you wearing shoes made of tanned leather and dyeing
your hair with Hinna; (a kind of dye). I also noticed that whenever you were
in Mecca, the people assume l,hram on seeing the new moon crescent (1st
of Dhul-Hijja) while you did not assume the Ihlal (Ihram)--(Ihram is also called
Ihlal which means 'Loud calling' because a Muhrim has to recite Talbiya
aloud when assuming the state of Ihram)--till the 8th of Dhul-Hijja (Day of
Tarwiya). 'Abdullah replied, "Regarding the corners of Ka'ba, I never saw
Allah's Apostle touching except those facing south (Yemen) and regarding
the tanned leather shoes, no doubt I saw Allah's Apostle wearing non-hairy
shoes and he used to perform ablution while wearing the shoes (i.e. wash
his feet and then put on the shoes). So I love to wear similar shoes. And
about the dyeing of hair with Hinna; no doubt I saw Allah's Apostle dyeing
his hair with it and that is why I like to dye (my hair with it). Regarding Ihlal, I
did not see Allah's Apostle assuming Ihlal till he set out for Hajj (on the 8th
of Dhul-Hijja)."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 168:
Narrated Um-'Atiya:
that the Prophet at the time of washing his deceased daughter had said to
them, "Start from the right side beginning with those parts which are
washed in ablution."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 169:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to like to start from the right side on wearing shoes,
combing his hair and cleaning or washing himself and on doing anything
else.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 170:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
saw Allah's Apostle when the 'Asr prayer was due and the people searched
for water to perform ablution but they could not find it. Later on (a pot full
of) water for ablution was brought to Allah's Apostle . He put his hand in
that pot and ordered the people to perform ablution from it. I saw the water
springing out from underneath his fingers till all of them performed the
ablution (it was one of the miracles of the Prophet).

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 171:
Narrated Ibn Sirrn:
I said to 'Ablda, "I have some of the hair of the Prophet which I got from
Anas or from his family." 'Abida replied. "No doubt if I had a single hair of
that it would have been dearer to me than the whole world and whatever is
in it."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 172:
Narrated Anas:
When Allah's Apostle got his head shaved, Abu- Talha was the first to take
some of his hair.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 173:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If a dog drinks from the utensil of anyone of you it is
essential to wash it seven times."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 174:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "A man saw a dog eating mud from (the severity of) thirst.
So, that man took a shoe (and filled it) with water and kept on pouring the
water for the dog till it quenched its thirst. So Allah approved of his deed
and made him to enter Paradise." And narrated Hamza bin 'Abdullah: My
father said. "During the lifetime of Allah's Apostle, the dogs used to urinate,
and pass through the mosques (come and go), nevertheless they never used
to sprinkle water on it (urine of the dog.)"

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 175:
Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim:
I asked the Prophet (about the hunting dogs) and he replied, "If you let
loose (with Allah's name) your tamed dog after a game and it hunts it, you
may eat it, but if the dog eats of (that game) then do not eat it because the
dog has hunted it for itself." I further said, "Sometimes I send my dog for
hunting and find another dog with it. He said, "Do not eat the game for you
have mentioned Allah's name only on sending your dog and not the other
dog."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 176:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "A person is considered in prayer as long as he is
waiting for the prayer in the mosque as long as he does not do Hadath." A
non-Arab man asked, "O Abii Huraira! What is Hadath?" I replied, "It is the
passing of wind (from the anus) (that is one of the types of Hadath)."
Volume 1, Book 4, Number 177:
Narrated 'Abbas bin Tamim:
My uncle said: The Prophet said, "One should not leave his prayer unless he
hears sound or smells something."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 178:
Narrated 'Ali:
I used to get emotional urethral discharges frequently and felt shy to ask
Allah's Apostle about it. So I requested Al-Miqdad bin Al-Aswad to ask (the
Prophet ) about it. Al-Miqdad asked him and he replied, "On has to perform
ablution (after it)."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 179:
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid:
I asked 'Uthman bin 'Affan about a person who engaged in intercourse but
did no discharge. 'Uthman replied, "He should perform ablution like the one
for ar ordinary prayer but he must wash his penis." 'Uthman added, "I heard
it from Allah's Apostle." I asked 'Ali Az-Zubair, Talha and Ubai bin Ka'b about
it and they, too, gave the same reply. (This order was cancelled later on and
taking a bath became necessary for such cases).

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 180:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khud:
Allah's Apostle sent for a Ansari man who came with water dropping from
his head. The Prophet said, "Perhaps we have forced you to hurry up,
haven't we?" The Ansari replied, "Yes." Allah's Apostle further said, "If you
are forced to hurry up (during intercourse) or you do not discharge the
ablution is due on you (This order was cancelled later on, i.e. one has to take
a bath).

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 181:
Narrated Usama bin Zaid:
"When Allah's Apostle departed from 'Arafat, he turned towards a mountain
pass where he answered the call of nature. (After he had finished) I poured
water and he performed ablution and then I said to him, "O Allah's Apostle!
Will you offer the prayer?" He replied, "The Musalla (place of the prayer) is
ahead of you (in Al-Muzdalifa)."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 182:
Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba:
I was in the company of Allah's Apostle on one of the journeys and he went
out to answer the call of nature (and after he finished) I poured water and
he performed ablution; he washed his face, forearms and passed his wet
hand over his head and over the two Khuff, (leather socks).

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 183:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
that he stayed overnight in the house of Maimuna the wife of the Prophet,
his aunt. He added : I lay on the bed (cushion transversally) while Allah's
Apostle and his wife lay in the length-wise direction of the cushion. Allah's
Apostle slept till the middle of the night, either a bit before or a bit after it
and then woke up, rubbing the traces of sleep off his face with his hands. He
then, recited the last ten verses of Sura Al-Imran, got up and went to a
hanging water-skin. He then Performed the ablution from it and it was a
perfect ablution, and then stood up to offer the prayer. I, too, got up and
did as the Prophet had done. Then I went and stood by his side. He placed
his right hand on my head and caught my right ear and twisted it. He prayed
two Rakat then two Rakat and two Rakat and then two Rakat and then two
Rakat and then two Rakat (separately six times), and finally one Rak'a (the
Witr). Then he lay down again in the bed till the Mu'adhdhin came to him
where upon the Prophet got up, offered a two light Rakat prayer and went
out and led the Fajr prayer

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 184:
Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr:
I came to 'Aisha the wife of the Prophet during the solar eclipse. The people
were standing and offering the prayer and she was also praying. I asked her,
"What is wrong with the people?" She beckoned with her hand towards the
sky and said, "Subhan Allah." I asked her, "Is there a sign?" She pointed out,
"Yes." So I, too, stood for the prayer till I fell unconscious and later on I
poured water on my head. After the prayer, Allah's Apostle praised and
glorified Allah and said, "Just now I have seen something which I never saw
before at this place of mine, including Paradise and Hell. I have been inspired
(and have understood) that you will be put to trials in your graves and these
trials will be like the trials of Ad-Dajjal, or nearly like it (the sub narrator is
not sure of what Asma' said). Angels will come to every one of you and ask,
'What do you know about this man?' A believer will reply, 'He is Muhammad,
Allah's Apostle , and he came to us with self-evident truth and guidance. So
we accepted his teaching, believed and followed him.' Then the angels will
say to him to sleep in peace as they have come to know that he was a
believer. On the other hand a hypocrite or a doubtful person will reply, 'I do
not know but heard the people saying something and so I said the same.' "

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 185:
Narrated Yahya Al-Mazini:
A person asked 'Abdullah bin Zaid who was the grandfather of 'Amr bin
Yahya, "Can you show me how Allah's Apostle used to perform ablution?"
'Abdullah bin Zaid replied in the affirmative and asked for water. He poured
it on his hands and washed them twice, then he rinsed his mouth thrice and
washed his nose with water thrice by putting water in it and blowing it out.
He washed his face thrice and after that he washed his forearms up to the
elbows twice and then passed his wet hands over his head from its front to
its back and vice versa (beginning from the front and taking them to the
back of his head up to the nape of the neck and then brought them to the
front again from where he had started) and washed his feet (up to the
ankles).

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 186:
Narrated 'Amr:
My father saw 'Amr bin Abi Hasan asking 'Abdullah bin Zaid about the
ablution of the Prophet. 'Abdullah bin Zaid asked for earthen-ware pot
containing water and in front of them performed ablution like that of the
Prophet . He poured water from the pot over his hand and washed his hands
thrice and then he put his hands in the pot and rinsed his mouth and washed
his nose by putting water in it and then blowing it out with three handfuls of
water. Again he put his hand in the water and washed his face thrice and
washed his forearms up to the elbows twice; and then put his hands in the
water and then passed them over his head by bringing them to the front
and then to the rear of the head once, and then he washed his feet up to the
ankles.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 187:
Narrated Abu Juhaifa:
Allah's Apostle came to us at noon and water for ablution was brought to
him. After he had performed ablution, the remaining water was taken by the
people and they started smearing their bodies with it (as a blessed thing).
The Prophet offered two Rakat of the Zuhr prayer and then two Rakat of
the 'Asr prayer while an 'Anza (spear-headed stick) was there (as a Sutra) in
front of him. Abu Musa said: The Prophet asked for a tumbler containing
water and washed both his hands and face in it and then threw a mouthful
of water in the tumbler and said to both of us (Abu Musa and Bilal), "Drink
from the tumbler and pour some of its water on your faces and chests."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 188:
Narrated Ibn Shihab:
Mahmud bin Ar-Rabi' who was the person on whose face the Prophet had
ejected a mouthful of water from his family's well while he was a boy, and
'Urwa (on the authority of Al-Miswar and others) who testified each other,
said, "Whenever the Prophet , performed ablution, his companions were
nearly fighting for the remains of the water."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 189:
Narrated As-Sa'ib bin Yazid:
My aunt took me to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! This son of my
sister has got a disease in his legs." So he passed his hands on my head and
prayed for Allah's blessings for me; then he performed ablution and I drank
from the remaining water. I stood behind him and saw the seal of
Prophethood between his shoulders, and it was like the "Zir-al-Hijla" (means
the button of a small tent, but some said 'egg of a partridge.' etc.)

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 190:
Narrated 'Amr bin Yahya:
(on the authority of his father) 'Abdullah bin Zaid poured water on his hands
from a utensil containing water and washed them and then with one
handful of water he rinsed his mouth and cleaned his nose by putting water
in it and then blowing it out. He repeated it thrice. He, then, washed his
hands and forearms up to the elbows twice and passed wet hands over his
head, both forwards and backwards, and washed his feet up to the ankles
and said, "This is the ablution of Allah's Apostle."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 191:
Narrated Amr bin Yahya:
My father said, "I saw Amr bin Abi Hasan asking 'Abdullah bin Zaid about the
ablution of the Prophet. Abdullah bin Zaid asked for an earthenware pot
containing water and performed ablution in front of them. He poured water
over his hands and washed them thrice. Then he put his (right) hand in the
pot and rinsed his mouth and washed his nose by putting water in it and
then blowing it out thrice with three handfuls of water Again he put his
hand in the water and washed his face thrice. After that he put his hand in
the pot and washed his forearms up to the elbows twice and then again put
his hand in the water and passed wet hands over his head by bringing them
to the front and then to the back and once more he put his hand in the pot
and washed his feet (up to the ankles.)"

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 192:
Narrated Wuhaib: that he (the Prophet in narration 191 above) had passed
his wet hands

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 193:
Narrated Jabir:
Allah's Apostle came to visit me while I was sick and unconscious. He
performed ablution and sprinkled the remaining water on me and I became
conscious and said, "O Allah's Apostle! To whom will my inheritance go as I
have neither ascendants nor descendants?" Then the Divine verses
regarding Fara'id (inheritance) were revealed.
Volume 1, Book 4, Number 194:
Narrated Anas:
It was the time for prayer, and those whose houses were near got up and
went to their people (to perform ablution), and there remained some
people (sitting). Then a painted stove pot (Mikhdab) containing water was
brought to Allah's Apostles The pot was small, not broad enough for one to
spread one's hand in; yet all the people performed ablution. (The sub
narrator said, "We asked Anas, 'How many persons were you?' Anas replied
'We were eighty or more"). (It was one of the miracles of Allah's Apostle).

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 195:
Narrated Abu Musa:
Once the Prophet asked for a tumbler containing water. He washed his
hands and face in it and also threw a mouthful of water in it.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 196:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid:
Once Allah's Apostle came to us and we brought out water for him in a brass
pot. He performed ablution thus: He washed his face thrice, and his
forearms to the elbows twice, then passed his wet hands lightly over the
head from front to rear and brought them to front again and washed his
feet (up to the ankles).

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 197:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When the ailment of the Prophet became aggravated and his disease
became severe, he asked his wives to permit him to be nursed (treated) in
my house. So they gave him the permission. Then the Prophet came (to my
house) with the support of two men, and his legs were dragging on the
ground, between 'Abbas, and another man." 'Ubaid-Ullah (the sub narrator)
said, "I informed 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas of what'Aisha said. Ibn 'Abbas said:
'Do you know who was the other man?' I replied in the negative. Ibn 'Abbas
said, 'He was 'Ali (bin Abi Talib)." 'Aisha further said, "When the Prophet
came to my house and his sickness became aggravated he ordered us to
pour seven skins full of water on him, so that he might give some advice to
the people. So he was seated in a Mikhdab (brass tub) belonging to Hafsa,
the wife of the Prophet. Then, all of us started pouring water on him from
the water skins till he beckoned to us to stop and that we have done (what
he wanted us to do). After that he went out to the people."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 198:
Narrated 'Amr bin Yahya:
(on the authority of his father) My uncle used to perform ablution
extravagantly and once he asked 'Abdullah bin Zaid to tell him how he had
seen the Prophet performing ablution. He asked for an earthen-ware pot
containing water, and poured water from it on his hands and washed them
thrice, and then put his hand in the earthen-ware pot and rinsed his mouth
and washed his nose by putting water in it and then blowing it Out thrice
with one handful of water; he again put his hand in the water and took a
handful of water and washed his face thrice, then washed his hands up to
the elbows twice, and took water with his hand, and passed it over his head
from front to back and then from back to front, and then washed his feet
(up to the ankles) and said, "I saw the Prophet performing ablution in that
way."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 199:
Narrated Thabit:
Anas said, "The Prophet asked for water and a tumbler with a broad base
and no so deep, containing a small quantity of water, was brought to him
whereby he put his fingers in it." Anas further said, ' noticed the water
springing out from amongst his fingers." Anas added, ' estimated that the
people who performed ablution with it numbered between seventy to
eighty."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 200:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet used to take a bath with one Saor up to five Mudds (1 Sa'=
Mudds) of water and used to perform ablution with one Mudd of water.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 201:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas said, "The Prophet passed wet hands over his Khuffs."
'Abdullah bin 'Umar asked Umar about it. 'Umar replied in the affirmative
and added, "Whenever Sa'd narrates a Hadith from the Prophet, there is no
need to ask anyone else about it."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 202:
Narrated Al-Mughlra bin Shu'ba:
Once Allah's Apostle went out to answer the call of nature and I followed
him with a tumbler containing water, and when he finished, I poured water
and he performed ablution and passed wet hands over his Khuffs.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 203:
Narrated Ja'far bin 'Amr bin Umaiya Ad-Damri:
My father said, "I saw the Prophet passing wet hands over his Khuffs."
Volume 1, Book 4, Number 204:
Narrated Ja'far bin 'Amr:
My father said, "I saw the Prophet passing wet hands over his turban and
Khuffs (leather socks)."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 205:
Narrated 'Urwa bin Al-Mughira:
My father said, "Once I was in the company of the Prophet on a journey and
I dashed to take off his Khuffs. He ordered me to leave them as he had put
them after performing ablution. So he passed wet hands or them.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 206:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle ate a piece of cooked mutton from the shoulder region and
prayed without repeating ablution.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 207:
Narrated Ja'far bin 'Amr bin Umaiya:
My father said, "I saw Allah's Apostle taking a piece of (cooked) mutton
from the shoulder region and then he was called for prayer. He put his knife
down and prayed without repeating ablution."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 208:
Narrated Suwaid bin Al-Nu'man:
In the year of the conquest of Khaibar I went with Allah's Apostle till we
reached Sahba,' a place near Khaibar, where Allah's Apostle offered the 'Asr
prayer and asked for food. Nothing but Sawrq was brought. He ordered it to
be moistened with water. He and all of us ate it and the Prophet got up for
the evening prayer (Maghrib prayer), rinsed his mouth with water and we
did the same, and he then prayed without repeating the ablution.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 209:
Narrated Maimuna:
The Prophet ate (a piece of) mutton from the shoulder region and then
prayed without repeating the ablution.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 210:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle drank milk, rinsed his mouth and said, "It has fat."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 211:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said, "If anyone of you feels drowsy while praying he should
go to bed (sleep) till his slumber is over because in praying while drowsy one
does not know whether one is asking for forgiveness or for a bad thing for
oneself."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 212:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "If anyone of you feels drowsy while praying, he should
sleep till he understands what he is saying (reciting)."
Volume 1, Book 4, Number 213:
Narrated 'Amr bin 'Amir:
Anas said, "The Prophet used to perform ablution for every prayer." I asked
Anas, "What you used to do?' Anas replied, "We used to pray with the same
ablution until we break it with Hadath."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 214:
Narrated Suwaid bin Nu'man:
In the year of the conquest of Khaibar I went with Allah's Apostle till we
reached As-Sahba' where Allah's Apostle led the 'Asr prayer and asked for
the food. Nothing but Sawiq was brought and we ate it and drank (water).
The Prophet got up for the (Maghrib) Prayer, rinsed his mouth with water
and then led the prayer without repeating the ablution.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 215:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Once the Prophet, while passing through one of the grave-yards of Medina
or Mecca heard the voices of two persons who were being tortured in their
graves. The Prophet said, "These two persons are being tortured not for a
major sin (to avoid)." The Prophet then added, "Yes! (they are being
tortured for a major sin). Indeed, one of them never saved himself from
being soiled with his urine while the other used to go about with calumnies
(to make enmiy between friends). The Prophet then asked for a green leaf
of a date-palm tree, broke it into two pieces and put one on each grave. On
being asked why he had done so, he replied, "I hope that their torture might
be lessened, till these get dried."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 216:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Whenever the Prophet went to answer the call of nature, I used to bring
water with which he used to clean his private parts.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 217:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet once passed by two graves and said, "These two persons are
being tortured not for a major sin (to avoid). One of them never saved
himself from being soiled with his urine, while the other used to go about
with calumnies(to make enmity between friends)." The Prophet then took a
green leaf of a date-palm tree, split it into (pieces) and fixed one on each
grave. They said, "O Allah's Apostle! Why have you done so?" He replied, "I
hope that their punishment might be lessened till these (the pieces of the
leaf) become dry." (See the foot-note of Hadith 215).

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 218:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet saw a Bedouin making water in the mosque and told the
people not to disturb him. When he finished, the Prophet asked for some
water and poured it over (the urine).

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 219:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A Bedouin stood up and started making water in the mosque. The people
caught him but the Prophet ordered them to leave him and to pour a bucket
or a tumbler of water over the place where he had passed the urine. The
Prophet then said, "You have been sent to make things easy and not to
make them difficult."
Volume 1, Book 4, Number 220:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said as above (219).

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 221:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
A Bedouin came and passed urine in one corner of the mosque. The people
shouted at him but the Prophet stopped them till he finished urinating. The
Prophet ordered them to spill a bucket of water over that place and they did
so.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 222:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the mother of faithful believers) A child was brought to Allah's Apostle and
it urinated on the garment of the Prophet. The Prophet asked for water and
poured it over the soiled place.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 223:
Narrated Um Qais bint Mihsin:
I brought my young son, who had not started eating (ordinary food) to
Allah's Apostle who took him and made him sit in his lap. The child urinated
on the garment of the Prophet, so he asked for water and poured it over the
soiled (area) and did not wash it.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 224:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
Once the Prophet went to the dumps of some people and passed urine
while standing. He then asked for water and so I brought it to him and he
performed ablution.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 225:
Narrated Hudhaifa':
The Prophet and I walked till we reached the dumps of some people. He
stood, as any one of you stands, behind a wall and urinated. I went away,
but he beckoned me to come. So I approached him and stood near his back
till he finished.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 226:
Narrated Abu Wail:
Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari used to lay great stress on the question of urination and
he used to say, "If anyone from Bani Israel happened to soil his clothes with
urine, he used to cut that portion away." Hearing that, Hudhaifa said to Abu
Wail, "I wish he (Abu Musa) didn't (lay great stress on that matter)."
Hudhaifa added, "Allah's Apostle went to the dumps of some people and
urinated while standing."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 227:
Narrated Asma':
A woman came to the Prophet and said, "If anyone of us gets menses in her
clothes then what should she do?" He replied, "She should (take hold of the
soiled place), rub it and put it in the water and rub it in order to remove the
traces of blood and then pour water over it. Then she can pray in it."
Volume 1, Book 4, Number 228:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Fatima bint Abi Hubaish came to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle I
get persistent bleeding from the uterus and do not become clean. Shall I
give up my prayers?" Allah's Apostle replied, "No, because it is from a blood
vessel and not the menses. So when your real menses begins give up your
prayers and when it has finished wash off the blood (take a bath) and offer
your prayers." Hisham (the sub narrator) narrated that his father had also
said, (the Prophet told her): "Perform ablution for every prayer till the time
of the next period comes."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 229:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I used to wash the traces of Janaba (semen) from the clothes of the Prophet
and he used to go for prayers while traces of water were still on it (water
spots were still visible).

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 230:
Narrated 'Aisha:
as above (229).

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 231:
Narrated Sulaiman bin Yasar:
I asked 'Aisha about the clothes soiled with semen. She replied, "I used to
wash it off the clothes of Allah's Apostle and he would go for the prayer
while water spots were still visible. "
Volume 1, Book 4, Number 232:
Narrated 'Amr bin Maimun:
I heard Sulaiman bin Yasar talking about the clothes soiled with semen. He
said that 'Aisha had said, "I used to wash it off the clothes of Allah's Apostle
and he would go for the prayers while water spots were still visible on them.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 233:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I used to wash the semen off the clothes of the Prophet and even then I
used to notice one or more spots on them.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 234:
Narrated Abu Qilaba:
Anas said, "Some people of 'Ukl or 'Uraina tribe came to Medina and its
climate did not suit them. So the Prophet ordered them to go to the herd of
(Milch) camels and to drink their milk and urine (as a medicine). So they
went as directed and after they became healthy, they killed the shepherd of
the Prophet and drove away all the camels. The news reached the Prophet
early in the morning and he sent (men) in their pursuit and they were
captured and brought at noon. He then ordered to cut their hands and feet
(and it was done), and their eyes were branded with heated pieces of iron,
They were put in 'Al-Harra' and when they asked for water, no water was
given to them." Abu Qilaba said, "Those people committed theft and
murder, became infidels after embracing Islam and fought against Allah and
His Apostle ."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 235:
Narrated Anas:
Prior to the construction of the mosque, the Prophet offered the prayers at
sheep-folds.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 236:
Narrated Maimuna:
Allah's Apostle was asked regarding ghee (cooking butter) in which a mouse
had fallen. He said, "Take out the mouse and throw away the ghee around it
and use the rest."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 237:
Narrated Maimuna:
The Prophet was asked regarding ghee in which a mouse had fallen. He said,
"Take out the mouse and throw away the ghee around it (and use the rest.)"

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 238:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "A wound which a Muslim receives in Allah's cause will
appear on the Day of Resurrection as it was at the time of infliction; blood
will be flowing from the wound and its color will be that of the blood but
will smell like musk."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 239:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "We (Muslims) are the last (people to come in the
world) but (will be) the foremost (on the Day of Resurrection)." The same
narrator told that the Prophet had said, "You should not pass urine in
stagnant water which is not flowing then (you may need to) wash in it."
Volume 1, Book 4, Number 240:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
While Allah's Apostle was prostrating (as stated below).

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 241:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud:
Once the Prophet was offering prayers at the Ka'ba. Abu Jahl was sitting
with some of his companions. One of them said to the others, "Who
amongst you will bring the abdominal contents (intestines, etc.) of a camel
of Bani so and so and put it on the back of Muhammad, when he
prostrates?" The most unfortunate of them got up and brought it. He waited
till the Prophet prostrated and then placed it on his back between his
shoulders. I was watching but could not do any thing. I wish I had some
people with me to hold out against them. They started laughing and falling
on one another. Allah's Apostle was in prostration and he did not lift his
head up till Fatima (Prophet's daughter) came and threw that (camel's
abdominal contents) away from his back. He raised his head and said thrice,
"O Allah! Punish Quraish." So it was hard for Abu Jahl and his companions
when the Prophet invoked Allah against them as they had a conviction that
the prayers and invocations were accepted in this city (Mecca). The Prophet
said, "O Allah! Punish Abu Jahl, 'Utba bin Rabi'a, Shaiba bin Rabi'a, Al-Walid
bin 'Utba, Umaiya bin Khalaf, and 'Uqba bin Al Mu'it (and he mentioned the
seventh whose name I cannot recall). By Allah in Whose Hands my life is, I
saw the dead bodies of those persons who were counted by Allah's Apostle
in the Qalib (one of the wells) of Badr.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 242:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet once spat in his clothes.
Volume 1, Book 4, Number 243:
Narrated Aisha:
The Prophet said, "All drinks that produce intoxication are Haram (forbidden
to drink).

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 244:
Narrated Abu Hazim:
Sahl bin Sa'd As-Sa'idi, was asked by the people, "With what was the wound
of the Prophet treated? Sahl replied, "None remains among the people living
who knows that better than I. 'Ah used to bring water in his shield and
Fatima used to wash the blood off his face. Then straw mat was burnt and
the wound was filled with it."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 245:
Narrated Abu Burda:
My father said, "I came to the Prophet and saw him carrying a Siwak in his
hand and cleansing his teeth, saying, 'U' U'," as if he was retching while the
Siwak was in his mouth."

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 246:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
Whenever the Prophet got up at night, he used to clean his mouth with
Siwak.

Volume 1, Book 4, Number 247:
Narrated Al-Bara 'bin 'Azib:
The Prophet said to me, "Whenever you go to bed perform ablution like that
for the prayer, lie or your right side and say, "Allahumma aslamtu wajhi
ilaika, wa fauwadtu amri ilaika, wa alja'tu Zahri ilaika raghbatan wa rahbatan
ilaika. La Malja' wa la manja minka illa ilaika. Allahumma amantu bikitabika-lladhi anzalta wa bina-biyika-l ladhi arsalta" (O Allah! I surrender to You and
entrust all my affairs to You and depend upon You for Your Blessings both
with hope and fear of You. There is no fleeing from You, and there is no
place of protection and safety except with You O Allah! I believe in Your
Book (the Qur'an) which You have revealed and in Your Prophet
(Muhammad) whom You have sent). Then if you die on that very night, you
will die with faith (i.e. or the religion of Islam). Let the aforesaid words be
your last utterance (before sleep)." I repeated it before the Prophet and
when I reached "Allahumma amantu bikitabika-l-ladhi anzalta (O Allah I
believe in Your Book which You have revealed)." I said, "Wa-rasulika (and
your Apostle)." The Prophet said, "No, (but say): 'Wanabiyika-l-ladhi arsalta
(Your Prophet whom You have sent), instead."
BOOK 5. BATHING (GHUSL) (248-292)
Volume 1, Book 5, Number 248:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Whenever the Prophet took a bath after Janaba he started by washing his
hands and then performed ablution like that for the prayer. After that he
would put his fingers in water and move the roots of his hair with them, and
then pour three handfuls of water over his head and then pour water all
over his body.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 249:
Narrated Maimuna:
(the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle performed ablution like that for
the prayer but did not wash his feet. He washed off the discharge from his
private parts and then poured water over his body. He withdrew his feet
from that place (the place where he took the bath) and then washed them.
And that was his way of taking the bath of Janaba.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 250:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet and I used to take a bath from a single pot called 'Faraq'.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 251:
Narrated Abu Salama:
'Aisha's brother and I went to 'Aisha and he asked her about the bath of the
Prophet. She brought a pot containing about a Sa' of water and took a bath
and poured it over her head and at what time there was a screen between
her and us.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 252:
Narrated Abu Ja'far:
While I and my father were with Jabir bin 'Abdullah, some People asked him
about taking a bath He replied, "A Sa' of water is sufficient for you." A man
said, "A Sa' is not sufficient for me." Jabir said, "A Sa was sufficient for one
who had more hair than you and was better than you (meaning the
Prophet)." And then Jabir (put on) his garment and led the prayer.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 253:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet and Maimuna used to take a bath from a single pot.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 254:
Narrated Jubair bin Mutim:
Allah's Apostle said, "As for me, I pour water three times on my head." And
he pointed with both his hands.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 255:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet used to pour water three times on his head.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 256:
Narrated Abu Ja'far:
Jabir bin Abdullah said to me, "Your cousin (Hasan bin Muhammad bin AlHanafiya) came to me and asked about the bath of Janaba. I replied, 'The
Prophet uses to take three handfuls of water, pour them on his head and
then pour more water over his body.' Al-Hasan said to me, 'I am a hairy
man.' I replied, 'The Prophet had more hair than you'. "

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 257:
Narrated Maimuna:
I placed water for the bath of the Prophet. He washed his hands twice or
thrice and then poured water on his left hand and washed his private parts.
He rubbed his hands over the earth (and cleaned them), rinsed his mouth,
washed his nose by putting water in it and blowing it out, washed his face
and both forearms and then poured water over his body. Then he withdrew
from that place and washed his feet.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 258:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Whenever the Prophet took the bath of Janaba (sexual relation or wet
dream) he asked for the Hilab or some other scent. He used to take it in his
hand, rub it first over the right side of his head and then over the left and
then rub the middle of his head with both hands.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 259:
Narrated Maimuna:
I placed water for the bath of the Prophet and he poured water with his
right hand on his left and washed them. Then he washed his private parts
and rubbed his hands on the ground, washed them with water, rinsed his
mouth and washed his nose by putting water in it and blowing it out,
washed his face and poured water on his head. He withdrew from that place
and washed his feet. A piece of cloth (towel) was given to him but he did
not use it.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 260:
Narrated Maimuna:
The Prophet took the bath of Janaba. (sexual relation or wet dream). He
first cleaned his private parts with his hand, and then rubbed it(that hand)
on the wall (earth) and washed it. Then he performed ablution like that for
the prayer, and after the bath he washed his feet.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 261:
Narrated Aisha:
The Prophet and I used to take a bath from a single pot of water and our
hands used to go in the pot after each other in turn.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 262:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Whenever Allah's Apostle took a bath of Janaba, he washed his hands first.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 263:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet and I used to take a bath from a single pot of water after
Janaba.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 264:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
the Prophet and one of his wives used to take a bath from a single pot of
water. (Shu'ba added to Anas's Statement "After the Janaba")

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 265:
Narrated Maimuna:
I placed water for the bath of Allah's Apostle and he poured water over his
hands and washed them twice or thrice; then he poured water with his right
hand over his left and washed his private parts (with his left hand). He
rubbed his hand over the earth and rinsed his mouth and washed his nose
by putting water in it and blowing it out. After that he washed his face, both
fore arms and head thrice and then poured water over his body. He
withdrew from that place and washed his feet.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 266:
Narrated Maimuna bint Al-Harith:
I placed water for the bath of Allah's Apostle and put a screen. He poured
water over his hands, and washed them once or twice. (The subnarrator
added that he did not remember if she had said thrice or not). Then he
poured water with his right hand over his left one and washed his private
parts. He rubbed his hand over the earth or the wall and washed it. He
rinsed his mouth and washed his nose by putting water in it and blowing it
out. He washed his face, forearms and head. He poured water over his body
and then withdrew from that place and washed his feet. I presented him a
piece of cloth (towel) and he pointed with his hand (that he does not want
it) and did not take it.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 267:
Narrated Muhammad bin Al-Muntathir:
on the authority of his father that he had asked 'Aisha (about the Hadith of
Ibn 'Umar). She said, "May Allah be Merciful to Abu 'Abdur-Rahman. I used
to put scent on Allah's Apostle and he used to go round his wives, and in the
morning he assumed the Ihram, and the fragrance of scent was still coming
out from his body."

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 268:
Narrated Qatada:
Anas bin Malik said, "The Prophet used to visit all his wives in a round, during
the day and night and they were eleven in number." I asked Anas, "Had the
Prophet the strength for it?" Anas replied, "We used to say that the Prophet
was given the strength of thirty (men)." And Sa'id said on the authority of
Qatada that Anas had told him about nine wives only (not eleven).

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 269:
Narrated 'Ali:
I used to get emotional urethral discharge frequently. Being the son-in-law
of the Prophet I requested a man to ask him about it. So the man asked the
Prophet about it. The Prophet replied, "Perform ablution after washing your
organ (penis)."

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 270:
Narrated Muhammad bin Al-Muntathir:
on the authority of his father that he had asked 'Aisha about the saying of
Ibn 'Umar(i.e. he did not like to be a Muhrim while the smell of scent was
still coming from his body). 'Aisha said, "I scented Allah's Apostle and he
went round (had sexual intercourse with) all his wives, and in the morning
he was Muhrim (after taking a bath)."
Volume 1, Book 5, Number 271:
Narrated 'Aisha:
It is as if I am just looking at the glitter of scent in the parting of the
Prophet's head hair while he was a Muhrim.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 272:
Narrated Hisham bin 'Urwa:
(on the authority of his father) 'Aisha said, "Whenever Allah's Apostle took
the bath of Janaba, he cleaned his hands and performed ablution like that
for prayer and then took a bath and rubbed his hair, till he felt that the
whole skin of the head had become wet, then he would pour water thrice
and wash the rest of the body." 'Aisha further said, "I and Allah's Apostle
used to take a bath from a single water container, from which we took
water simultaneously."

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 273:
Narrated Maimuna:
Water was placed for the ablution of Allah's Apostle after Janaba. He
poured water with his right hand over his left twice or thrice and then
washed his private parts and rubbed his hand on the earth or on a wall twice
or thrice and then rinsed his mouth, washed his nose by putting water in it
and then blowing it out arid then washed his face and forearms and poured
water over his head and washed his body. Then he shifted from that place
and washed his feet. I brought a piece of cloth, but he did not take it and
removed the traces of water from his body with his hand."

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 274:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Once the call (Iqama) for the prayer was announced and the rows were
straightened. Allah's Apostle came out; and when he stood up at his
Musalla, he remembered that he was Junub. Then he ordered us to stay at
our places and went to take a bath and then returned with water dropping
from his head. He said, "Allahu-Akbar", and we all offered the prayer with
him.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 275:
Narrated Maimuna:
I placed water for the bath of the Prophet and screened him with a garment.
He poured water over his hands and washed them. After that he poured
water with his right hand over his left and washed his private parts, rubbed
his hands with earth and washed them, rinsed his mouth, washed his nose
by putting water in it and then blowing it out and then washed his face and
forearms. He poured water over his head and body. He then shifted from
that place and washed his feet. I gave him a piece of cloth but he did not
take it and came out removing the water (from his body) with both his
hands.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 276:
Narrated Aisha:
Whenever any one of us was Junub, she poured water over her head thrice
with both her hands and then rubbed the right side of her head with one
hand and rubbed the left side of the head with the other hand.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 277:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, 'The (people of) Bani Israel used to take bath naked (all
together) looking at each other. The Prophet Moses used to take a bath
alone. They said, 'By Allah! Nothing prevents Moses from taking a bath with
us except that he has a scrotal hernia.' So once Moses went out to take a
bath and put his clothes over a stone and then that stone ran away with his
clothes. Moses followed that stone saying, "My clothes, O stone! My
clothes, O stone! till the people of Bani Israel saw him and said, 'By Allah,
Moses has got no defect in his body. Moses took his clothes and began to
beat the stone." Abu Huraira added, "By Allah! There are still six or seven
marks present on the stone from that excessive beating."
Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet said, "When the Prophet Job (Aiyub)
was taking a bath naked, golden locusts began to fall on him. Job started
collecting them in his clothes. His Lord addressed him, 'O Job! Haven't I
given you enough so that you are not in need of them.' Job replied, 'Yes!' By
Your Honor (power)! But I cannot dispense with Your Blessings.' "

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 278:
Narrated Um Hani bint Abi Talib:
I went to Allah's Apostle in the year of the conquest of Mecca and found
him taking a bath while Fatima was screening him. The Prophet asked, "Who
is it?" I replied, "I am Um-Hani."

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 279:
Narrated Maimuna:
I screened the Prophet while he was taking a bath of Janaba. He washed his
hands, poured water from his right hand over his left and washed his private
parts. Then he rubbed his hand over a wall or the earth, and performed
ablution similar to that for the prayer but did not wash his feet. Then he
poured water over his body, shifted from that place, and washed his feet.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 280:
Narrated Um-Salama:
(the mother of the believers) Um Sulaim, the wife of Abu Talha, came to
Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Verily Allah is not shy of (telling
you) the truth. Is it necessary for a woman to take a bath after she has a wet
dream (nocturnal sexual discharge)?" Allah's Apostle replied, "Yes, if she
notices a discharge."

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 281:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet came across me in one of the streets of Medina and at that
time I was Junub. So I slipped away from him and went to take a bath. On
my return the Prophet said, "O Abu Huraira! Where have you been?" I
replied, "I was Junub, so I disliked to sit in your company." The Prophet said,
"Subhan Allah! A believer never becomes impure."

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 282:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet used to visit all his wives in one night and he had nine wives at
that time.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 283:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle came across me and I was Junub He took my hand and I
went along with him till he sat down I slipped away, went home and took a
bath. When I came back. he was still sitting there. He then said to me, "O
AbuHuraira! Where have you been?' I told him about it The Prophet said,
"Subhan Allah! O Abu Huraira! A believer never becomes impure."
Volume 1, Book 5, Number 284:
Narrated Abu Salama :
I asked 'Aisha "Did the Prophet use to sleep while he was Junub?" She
replied, "Yes, but he used to perform ablution (before going to bed).

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 285:
Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:
I asked Allah's Apostle "Can any one of us sleep while he is Junub?" He
replied, "Yes, if he performs ablution, he can sleep while he is Junub."

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 286:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Whenever the Prophet intended to sleep while he was Junub, he used to
wash his private parts and perform ablution like that for the prayer.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 287:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
'Umar asked the Prophet "Can anyone of us sleep while he is Junub?" He
replied, "Yes, if he performs ablution."

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 288:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Umar bin Al-Khattab told Allah's Apostle, "I became Junub at night." Allah's
Apostle replied, "Perform ablution after washing your private parts and then
sleep."
Volume 1, Book 5, Number 289:
Narrated Hisham:
as the following Hadith 290.

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 290:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "When a man sits in between the four parts of a woman
and did the sexual intercourse with her, bath becomes compulsory."

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 291:
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid AjJuhani:
I asked 'Uthman bin 'Affan about a man who engaged in the sexual
intercourse with his wife but did not discharge. 'Uthman replied, "He should
perform ablution like that for the prayer after washing his private parts."
'Uthman added, "I heard that from Allah's Apostle." I asked 'Ali bin Abi Talib,
Az-Zubair bin Al-'Awwam, Talha bin 'Ubaidullah and Ubai bin Ka'b and a gave
the same reply. (Abu Aiylub said that he had heard that from Allah's Apostle
) (This order was cancelled later on so one has to take a bath. See, Hadith
No. 180).

Volume 1, Book 5, Number 292:
Narrated Ubai bin Ka'b:
I asked Allah's Apostle about a man who engages in sexual intercourse with
his wife but does not discharge. He replied, "He should wash the parts
which comes in contact with the private parts of the woman, perform
ablution and then pray." (Abu 'Abdullah said, "Taking a bath is safer and is
the last order."


BOOK 6. MENSTRUAL PERIODS (293-329)
Volume 1, Book 6, Number 293:
Narrated Al-Qasim:
'Aisha said, "We set out with the sole intention of performing Hajj and when
we reached Sarif, (a place six miles from Mecca) I got my menses. Allah's
Apostle came to me while I was weeping. He said 'What is the matter with
you? Have you got your menses?' I replied, 'Yes.' He said, 'This is a thing
which Allah has ordained for the daughters of Adam. So do what all the
pilgrims do with the exception of the Taw-af (Circumambulation) round the
Ka'ba." 'Aisha added, "Allah's Apostle sacrificed cows on behalf of his
wives."

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 294:
Narrated 'Aisha:
While in menses, I used to comb the hair of Allah's Apostle .

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 295:
Narrated 'Urwa:
A person asked me, "Can a woman in menses serve me? And can a Junub
woman come close to me?" I replied, "All this is easy for me. All of them can
serve me, and there is no harm for any other person to do the same. 'Aisha
told me that she used to comb the hair of Allah's Apostle while she was in
her menses, and he was in Itikaf (in the mosque). He would bring his head
near her in her room and she would comb his hair, while she used to be in
her menses."

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 296:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to lean on my lap and recite Qur'an while I was in menses.

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 297:
Narrated Um Salama:
While I was laying with the Prophet under a single woolen sheet, I got the
menses. I slipped away and put on the clothes for menses. He said, "Have
you got "Nifas" (menses)?" I replied, "Yes." He then called me and made me
lie with him under the same sheet.

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 298:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet and I used to take a bath from a single pot while we were
Junub. During the menses, he used to order me to put on an Izar (dress
worn below the waist) and used to fondle me. While in Itikaf, he used to
bring his head near me and I would wash it while I used to be in my periods
(menses).

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 299:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Al-Aswad:
(on the authority of his father) 'Aisha said: "Whenever Allah's Apostle
wanted to fondle anyone of us during her periods (menses), he used to
order her to put on an Izar and start fondling her." 'Aisha added, "None of
you could control his sexual desires as the Prophet could."

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 300:
Narrated Maimuna:
When ever Allah's Apostle wanted to fondle any of his wives during the
periods (menses), he used to ask her to wear an Izar.

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 301:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Once Allah's Apostle went out to the Musalla (to offer the prayer) o 'Id-alAdha or Al-Fitr prayer. Then he passed by the women and said, "O women!
Give alms, as I have seen that the majority of the dwellers of Hell-fire were
you (women)." They asked, "Why is it so, O Allah's Apostle ?" He replied,
"You curse frequently and are ungrateful to your husbands. I have not seen
anyone more deficient in intelligence and religion than you. A cautious
sensible man could be led astray by some of you." The women asked, "O
Allah's Apostle! What is deficient in our intelligence and religion?" He said,
"Is not the evidence of two women equal to the witness of one man?" They
replied in the affirmative. He said, "This is the deficiency in her intelligence.
Isn't it true that a woman can neither pray nor fast during her menses?" The
women replied in the affirmative. He said, "This is the deficiency in her
religion."

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 302:
Narrated 'Aisha:
We set out with the Prophet for Hajj and when we reached Sarif I got my
menses. When the Prophet came to me, I was weeping. He asked, "Why are
you weeping?" I said, "I wish if I had not performed Hajj this year." He asked,
"May be that you got your menses?" I replied, "Yes." He then said, "This is
the thing which Allah has ordained for all the daughters of Adam. So do
what all the pilgrims do except that you do not perform the Tawaf round
the Ka'ba till you are clean."

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 303:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Fatima bint Abi Hubaish said to Allah's Apostle, "O Allah's Apostle! I do not
become clean (from bleeding). Shall I give up my prayers?" Allah's Apostle
replied: "No, because it is from a blood vessel and not the menses. So when
the real menses begins give up your prayers and when it (the period) has
finished wash the blood off your body (take a bath) and offer your prayers."

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 304:
Narrated Asma' bint Abi Bakr:
A woman asked Allah's Apostle, "O Allah's Apostle! What should we do, if
the blood of menses falls on our clothes?" Allah's Apostle replied, "If the
blood of menses falls on the garment of anyone of you, she must take hold
of the blood spot, rub it, and wash it with water and then pray in (with it)."

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 305:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Whenever anyone of us got her menses, she, on becoming clean, used to
take hold of the blood spot and rub the blood off her garment, and pour
water over it and wash that portion thoroughly and sprinkle water over the
rest of the garment. After that she would pray in (with) it.

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 306:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Once one of the wives of the Prophet did Itikaf along with him and she was
getting bleeding in between her periods. She used to see the blood (from
her private parts) and she would perhaps put a dish under her for the blood.
(The sub-narrator 'Ikrima added, 'Aisha once saw the liquid of safflower and
said, "It looks like what so and so used to have.")
Volume 1, Book 6, Number 307:
Narrated 'Aisha:
"One of the wives of Allah's Apostle joined him in l'tikaf and she noticed
blood and yellowish discharge (from her private parts) and put a dish under
her when she prayed."

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 308:
Narrated 'Aisha:
One of the mothers of the faithful believers (i.e. the wives of the Prophet )
did l'tikaf while she was having bleeding in between her periods.

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 309:
Narrated 'Aisha:
None of us had more than a single garment and we used to have our menses
while wearing it. Whenever it got soiled with blood of menses we used to
apply saliva to the blood spot and rub off the blood with our nails.

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 310:
Narrated Um-'Atiya:
We were forbidden to mourn for a dead person for more than three days
except in the case of a husband for whom mourning was allowed for four
months and ten days. (During that time) we were not allowed to put ko,hl
(Antimony eye power) in our eyes or to use perfumes or to put on colored
clothes except a dress made of 'Asb (a kind of Yemen cloth, very coarse and
rough). We were allowed very light perfumes at the time of taking a bath
after menses and also we were forbidden to go with the funeral procession .
Volume 1, Book 6, Number 311:
Narrated 'Aisha:
A woman asked the Prophet about the bath which is take after finishing
from the menses. The Prophet told her what to do and said, "Purify yourself
with a piece of cloth scented with musk." The woman asked, "How shall I
purify myself with it" He said, "Subhan Allah! Purify yourself (with it)." I
pulled her to myself and said, "Rub the place soiled with blood with it."

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 312:
Narrated 'Aisha:
An Ansari woman asked the Prophet how to take a bath after finishing from
the menses. He replied, "Take a piece a cloth perfumed with musk and clean
the private parts with it thrice." The Prophet felt shy and turned his face. So
pulled her to me and told her what the Prophet meant.

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 313:
Narrated 'Aisha:
In the last Hajj of Allah's Apostle I assume the Ihram for Hajj along with Allah
Apostle. I was one of those who intended Tamattu' (to perform Hajj an
'Umra) and did not take the Hadi (animal for sacrifice) with me. I got my
menses and was not clean till the night of 'Arafa I said, "O Allah's Apostle! It
is the night of the day of 'Arafat and I intended to perform the Hajj Tamattu'
with 'Umra Allah's Apostle told me to undo my hair and comb it and to
postpone the 'Umra. I did the same and completed the Hajj. On the night of
Al-Hasba (i.e. place outside Mecca where the pilgrims go after finishing all
the ceremonies Hajj at Mina) he (the Prophet ordered 'Abdur Rahman
('Aisha's brother) to take me to At-Tan'im to assume the lhram for'Umra in
lieu of that of Hajj-atTamattu' which I had intended to perform.
Volume 1, Book 6, Number 314:
Narrated 'Aisha:
On the 1st of Dhul-Hijja we set out with the intention of performing Hajj.
Allah's Apostle said, "Any one who likes to assume the Ihram for 'Umra he
can do so. Had I not brought the Hadi with me, I would have assumed the
Ihram for 'Umra. "Some of us assumed the Ihram for 'Umra while the others
assumed the Ihram for Hajj. I was one of those who assumed the Ihram for
'Umra. I got menses and kept on menstruating until the day of 'Arafat and
complained of that to the Prophet . He told me to postpone my 'Umra, undo
and comb my hair, and to assure the Ihram of Hajj and I did so. On the right
of Hasba, he sent my brother 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Bakr with me to AtTah'im, where I assumed the Ihram for'Umra in lieu of the previous one.
Hisham said, "For that ('Umra) no Hadi, fasting or alms were required.

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 315:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "At every womb Allah appoints an angel who says, 'O
Lord! A drop of semen, O Lord! A clot. O Lord! A little lump of flesh." Then if
Allah wishes (to complete) its creation, the angel asks, (O Lord!) Will it be a
male or female, a wretched or a blessed, and how much will his provision
be? And what will his age be?' So all that is written while the child is still in
the mother's womb."

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 316:
Narrated 'Urwa:
'Aisha said, "We set out with the Prophet in his last Hajj. Some of us
intended to perform 'Umra while others Hajj. When we reached Mecca,
Allah's Apostle said, 'Those who had assumed the lhram for'Umra and had
not brought the Hadi should finish his lhram and whoever had assumed the
Ihram for 'Umra and brought the Hadi should not finish the Ihram till he has
slaughtered his Hadi and whoever had assumed the lhram for Hajj should
complete his Hajj." 'Aisha further said, "I got my periods (menses) and kept
on menstruating till the day of 'Arafat, and I had assumed the Ihram for
'Umra only (Tamattu'). The Prophet ordered me to undo and comb my head
hair and assume the lhram for Hajj only and leave the 'Umra. I did the same
till I completed the Hajj. Then the Prophet sent 'Abdur Rahman bin Abi Bakr
with me and ordered me to perform 'Umra from At-Tan'im in lieu of the
missed 'Umra."

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 317:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Fatima bint Abi Hubaish used to have bleeding in between the periods, so
she asked the Prophet about it . He replied, "The bleeding is from a blood
vessel and not the menses. So give up the prayers when the (real) menses
begin and when it has finished, take a bath and start praying."

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 318:
Narrated Mu'adha:
A woman asked 'Aisha, "Should I offer the prayers that which I did not offer
because of menses" 'Aisha said, "Are you from the Huraura' (a town in Iraq?)
We were with the Prophet and used to get our periods but he never ordered
us to offer them (the Prayers missed during menses)." 'Aisha perhaps said,
"We did not offer them."

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 319:
Narrated Zainab bint Abi Salama:
Um-Salama said, "I got my menses while I was lying with the Prophet under
a woolen sheet. So I slipped away, took the clothes for menses and put
them on. Allah's Apostle said, 'Have you got your menses?' I replied, 'Yes.'
Then he called me and took me with him under the woolen sheet." Um
Salama further said, "The Prophet used to kiss me while he was fasting. The
Prophet and I used to take the bath of Janaba from a single pot."

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 320:
Narrated Um Salama:
While I was lying with the Prophet under a woolen sheet, I got my menses. I
slipped away and put on the clothes for menses. The Prophet said, "Have
you got your menses?" I replied, "Yes." He called me and I slept with him
under the woolen sheet.

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 321:
Narrated Aiyub:
Hafsa said, 'We used to forbid our young women to go out for the two 'Id
prayers. A woman came and stayed at the palace of Bani Khalaf and she
narrated about her sister whose husband took part in twelve holy battles
along with the Prophet and her sister was with her husband in six (out of
these twelve). She (the woman's sister) said, "We used to treat the
wounded, look after the patients and once I asked the Prophet, 'Is there any
harm for any of us to stay at home if she doesn't have a veil?' He said, 'She
should cover herself with the veil of her companion and should participate in
the good deeds and in the religious gathering of the Muslims.' When Um
'Atiya came I asked her whether she had heard it from the Prophet. She
replied, "Yes. May my father be sacrificed for him (the Prophet)! (Whenever
she mentioned the Prophet she used to say, 'May my father be sacrificed for
him) I have heard the Prophet saying, 'The unmarried young virgins and the
mature girl who stay often screened or the young unmarried virgins who
often stay screened and the menstruating women should come out and
participate in the good deeds as well as the religious gathering of the
faithful believers but the menstruating women should keep away from the
Musalla (praying place).' " Hafsa asked Um 'Atiya surprisingly, "Do you say
the menstruating women?" She replied, "Doesn't a menstruating woman
attend 'Arafat (Hajj) and such and such (other deeds)?"

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 322:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Fatima bint Abi Hubaish asked the Prophet, "I got persistent bleeding (in
between the periods) and do not become clean. Shall I give up prayers?" He
replied, "No, this is from a blood vessel. Give up the prayers only for the
days on which you usually get the menses and then take a bath and offer
your prayers."

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 323:
Narrated Um 'Atiya:
We never considered yellowish discharge as a thing of importance (as
menses).

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 324:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) Um Habiba got bleeding in between the periods
for seven years. She asked Allah's Apostle about it. He ordered her to take a
bath (after the termination of actual periods) and added that it was (from) a
blood vessel. So she used to take a bath for every prayer.

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 325:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) I told Allah's Apostle that Safiya bint Huyai had got
her menses. He said, "She will probably delay us. Did she perform Tawaf (AlIfada) with you?" We replied, "Yes." On that the Prophet told her to depart.

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 326:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
A woman is al lowed to leave (go back home) if she gets menses (after
Tawaf-AlIfada). Ibn 'Umar formerly used to say that she should not leave but
later on I heard him saying, "She may leave, since Allah's Apostle gave them
the permission to leave (after Tawaf-AlIfada."

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 327:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said to me, "Give up the prayer when your menses begin and
when it has finished, wash the blood off your body (take a bath) and start
praying."

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 328:
Narrated Samura bin Jundab:
The Prophet offered the funeral prayer for the dead body of a woman who
died of (during) delivery (i.e. child birth) and he stood by the middle of her
body.

Volume 1, Book 6, Number 329:
Narrated Maimuna:
(the wife of the Prophet) During my menses, I never prayed, but used to sit
on the mat beside the mosque of Allah's Apostle. He used to offer the
prayer on his sheet and in prostration some of his clothes used to touch
me."
BOOK 7. RUBBING HANDS AND FEET WITH DUST (TAYAMMUM) (330-344)
Volume 1, Book 7, Number 330:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) We set out with Allahs Apostle on one of his
journeys till we reached Al-Baida' or Dhatul-Jaish, a necklace of mine was
broken (and lost). Allah's Apostle stayed there to search for it, and so did
the people along with him. There was no water at that place, so the people
went to Abu- Bakr As-Siddiq and said, "Don't you see what 'Aisha has done?
She has made Allah's Apostle and the people stay where there is no water
and they have no water with them." Abu Bakr came while Allah's Apostle
was sleeping with his head on my thigh, He said, to me: "You have detained
Allah's Apostle and the people where there is no water and they have no
water with them.
So he admonished me and said what Allah wished him to say and hit me on
my flank with his hand. Nothing prevented me from moving (because of
pain) but the position of Allah's Apostle on my thigh. Allah's Apostle got up
when dawn broke and there was no water. So Allah revealed the Divine
Verses of Tayammum. So they all performed Tayammum. Usaid bin Hudair
said, "O the family of Abu Bakr! This is not the first blessing of yours." Then
the camel on which I was riding was caused to move from its place and the
necklace was found beneath it.

Volume 1, Book 7, Number 331:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "I have been given five things which were not given to any
one else before me.
1. Allah made me victorious by awe, (by His frightening my enemies) for a
distance of one month's journey.
2. The earth has been made for me (and for my followers) a place for
praying and a thing to perform Tayammum, therefore anyone of my
followers can pray wherever the time of a prayer is due.
3. The booty has been made Halal (lawful) for me yet it was not lawful for
anyone else before me.
4. I have been given the right of intercession (on the Day of Resurrection).
5. Every Prophet used to be sent to his nation only but I have been sent to all
mankind.

Volume 1, Book 7, Number 332:
Narrated 'Urwa's father:
Aisha said, "I borrowed a necklace from Asma' and it was lost. So Allah's
Apostle sent a man to search for it and he found it. Then the time of the
prayer became due and there was no water. They prayed (without ablution)
and informed Allah's Apostle about it, so the verse of Tayammum was
revealed." Usaid bin Hudair said to 'Aisha, "May Allah reward you. By Allah,
whenever anything happened which you did not like, Allah brought good for
you and for the Muslims in that."
Al-Jurf and the time for the 'Asr prayer became due while he was at MarbadAnNa'am (sheep-fold), so he (performed Tayammum) and prayed there and
then entered Medina when the sun was still high but he did not repeat that
prayer.

Volume 1, Book 7, Number 333:
Narrated Abu Juhaim Al-Ansari:
The Prophet came from the direction of Bir Jamal. A man met him and
greeted him. But he did not return back the greeting till he went to a (mud)
wall and smeared his hands and his face with its dust (performed
Tayammum) and then returned back the greeting.
Volume 1, Book 7, Number 334:
Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin Abza:
A man came to 'Umar bin Al-Khattab and said, "I became Junub but no
water was available." 'Ammar bin Yasir said to 'Umar, "Do you remember
that you and I (became Junub while both of us) were together on a journey
and you didn't pray but I rolled myself on the ground and prayed? I informed
the Prophet about it and he said, 'It would have been sufficient for you to do
like this.' The Prophet then stroked lightly the earth with his hands and then
blew off the dust and passed his hands over his face and hands."

Volume 1, Book 7, Number 335:
Narrated Said bin 'Abdur Rahman bin Abza:
(on the authority of his father who said) 'Ammar said so (the above
Statement). And Shu'ba stroked lightly the earth with his hands and brought
them close to his mouth (blew off the dust) and passed them over his face
and then the backs of his hands. 'Ammar said, "Ablution (meaning
Tayammum here) is sufficient for a Muslim if water is not available."

Volume 1, Book 7, Number 336:
Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin Abza:
that while he was in the company of 'Umar, 'Ammar said to 'Umar, "We
were in a detachment and became Junub and I blew the dust off my hands
(performed the rolling over the earth and prayed.)"

Volume 1, Book 7, Number 337:
Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin Abza:
'Ammar said to 'Umar "I rolled myself in the dust and came to the Prophet
who said, 'Passing dusted hands over the face and the backs of the hands is
sufficient for you.' "

Volume 1, Book 7, Number 338:
Narrated 'Ammar:
as above.

Volume 1, Book 7, Number 339:
Narrated 'Ammar:
The Prophet stroked the earth with his hands and then passed them over his
face and the backs of his hands (while demonstrating Tayammum).

Volume 1, Book 7, Number 340:
Narrated 'Imran:
Once we were traveling with the Prophet and we carried on traveling till the
last part of the night and then we (halted at a place) and slept (deeply).
There is nothing sweeter than sleep for a traveler in the last part of the
night. So it was only the heat of the sun that made us to wake up and the
first to wake up was so and so, then so and so and then so and so (the
narrator 'Auf said that Abu Raja' had told him their names but he had
forgotten them) and the fourth person to wake up was 'Umar bin AlKhattab. And whenever the Prophet used to sleep, nobody would wake up
him till he himself used to get up as we did not know what was happening
(being revealed) to him in his sleep. So, 'Umar got up and saw the condition
of the people, and he was a strict man, so he said, "Allahu Akbar" and raised
his voice with Takbir, and kept on saying loudly till the Prophet got up
because of it. When he got up, the people informed him about what had
happened to them. He said, "There is no harm (or it will not be harmful).
Depart!" So they departed from that place, and after covering some
distance the Prophet stopped and asked for some water to perform the
ablution. So he performed the ablution and the call for the prayer was
pronounced and he led the people in prayer. After he finished from the
prayer, he saw a man sitting aloof who had not prayed with the people. He
asked, "O so and so! What has prevented you from praying with us?" He
replied, "I am Junub and there is no water. " The Prophet said, "Perform
Tayammum with (clean) earth and that is sufficient for you."
Then the Prophet proceeded on and the people complained to him of thirst.
Thereupon he got down and called a person (the narrator 'Auf added that
Abu Raja' had named him but he had forgotten) and 'Ali, and ordered them
to go and bring water. So they went in search of water and met a woman
who was sitting on her camel between two bags of water. They asked,
"Where can we find water?" She replied, "I was there (at the place of water)
this hour yesterday and my people are behind me." They requested her to
accompany them. She asked, "Where?" They said, "To Allah's Apostle ." She
said, "Do you mean the man who is called the Sabi, (with a new religion)?"
They replied, "Yes, the same person. So come along." They brought her to
the Prophet and narrated the whole story. He said, "Help her to dismount."
The Prophet asked for a pot, then he opened the mouths of the bags and
poured some water into the pot. Then he closed the big openings of the
bags and opened the small ones and the people were called upon to drink
and water their animals. So they all watered their animals and they (too) all
quenched their thirst and also gave water to others and last of all the
Prophet gave a pot full of water to the person who was Junub and told him
to pour it over his body. The woman was standing and watching all that
which they were doing with her water. By Allah, when her water bags were
returned the looked like as if they were more full (of water) than they had
been before (Miracle of Allah's Apostle) Then the Prophet ordered us to
collect something for her; so dates, flour and Sawiq were collected which
amounted to a good meal that was put in a piece of cloth. She was helped to
ride on her camel and that cloth full of food-stuff was also placed in front of
her and then the Prophet said to her, "We have not taken your water but
Allah has given water to us." She returned home late. Her relatives asked
her: "O so and so what has delayed you?" She said, "A strange thing! Two
men met me and took me to the man who is called the Sabi' and he did such
and such a thing. By Allah, he is either the greatest magician between this
and this (gesturing with her index and middle fingers raising them towards
the sky indicating the heaven and the earth) or he is Allah's true Apostle."
Afterwards the Muslims used to attack the pagans around her abode but
never touched her village. One day she said to her people, "I think that these
people leave you purposely. Have you got any inclination to Islam?" They
obeyed her and all of them embraced Islam.
Abu 'Abdultah said: The word Saba'a means "The one who has deserted his
old religion and embraced a new religion." Abul 'Ailya said, "The Sabis are a
sect of people of the Scripture who recite the Book of Psalms."

Volume 1, Book 7, Number 341:
Narrated Abu Wail:
Abu Muisa said to'Abdullah bin Mas'ud, "If one does not find water (for
ablution) can he give up the prayer?" Abdullah replied, "If you give the
permission to perform Tayammum they will perform Tayammum even if
water was available if one of them found it cold." Abu Musa said, "What
about the statement of 'Ammar to 'Umar?" 'Abdullah replied, "Umar was
not satisfied by his statement."

Volume 1, Book 7, Number 342:
Narrated Shaqiq bin Salama:
I was with 'Abdullah and Abu Musa; the latter asked the former, "O Abu
AbdurRahman! What is your opinion if somebody becomes Junub and no
water is available?" 'Abdullah replied, "Do not pray till water is found." Abu
Musa said, "What do you say about the statement of 'Ammar (who was
ordered by the Prophet to perform Tayammum). The Prophet said to him:
"Perform Tayammum and that would be sufficient." 'Abdullah replied,
"Don't you see that 'Umar was not satisfied by 'Ammar's statement?" Abu-
Musa said, "All right, leave 'Ammalr's statement, but what will you say about
this verse (of Tayammum)?" 'Abqiullah kept quiet and then said, "If we
allowed it, then they would probably perform Tayammum even if water was
available, if one of them found it (water) cold." The narrator added, "I said
to Shaqrq, "Then did 'Abdullah dislike to perform Tayammum because of
this?" He replied, "Yes."

Volume 1, Book 7, Number 343:
Narrated Al-A'mash:
Shaqiq said, "While I was sitting with 'Abdullah and Abu Musa Al-Ash-'ari, the
latter asked the former, 'If a person becomes Junub and does not find water
for one month, can he perform Tayammum and offer his prayer?' (He
applied in the negative). Abu Musa said, 'What do you say about this verse
from Surat "Al-Ma'ida": When you do not find water then perform
Tayammum with clean earth? 'Abdullah replied, 'If we allowed it then they
would probably perform Tayammum with clean earth even if water were
available but cold.' I said to Shaqiq, 'You then disliked to perform
Tayammum because of this?' Shaqiq said,'Yes.' (Shaqiq added), "Abu Musa
said, 'Haven't you heard the statement of 'Ammar to 'Umar? He said: I was
sent out by Allah's Apostle for some job and I became Junub and could not
find water so I rolled myself over the dust (clean earth) like an animal does,
and when I told the Prophet of that he said, 'Like this would have been
sufficient.' The Prophet (saying so) lightly stroked the earth with his hand
once and blew it off, then passed his (left) hand over the back of his right
hand or his (right) hand over the back of his left hand and then passed them
over his face.' So 'Abdullah said to Abu- Musa, 'Don't you know that 'Umar
was not satisfied with 'Ammar's statement?' "
Narrated Shaqiq: While I was with 'Abdullah and Abu Musa, the latter said to
the former, "Haven't you heard the statement of 'Ammar to 'Umar? He said,
"Allah's Apostle sent you and me out and I became Junub and rolled myself
in the dust (clean earth) (for Tayammum). When we came to Allah's Apostle
I told him about it and he said, 'This would have been sufficient,' passing his
hands over his face and the backs of his hands once only.' "
Volume 1, Book 7, Number 344:
Narrated 'Imran bin Husain Al-Khuza'i:
Allah's Apostle saw a person sitting aloof and not praying with the people.
He asked him, "O so and so! What prevented you from offering the prayer
with the people?" He replied, "O Allah's Apostle! I am Junub and there is no
water." The Prophet said, "Perform Tayammum with clean earth and that
will be sufficient for you."
BOOK 8. PRAYERS (SALAT) (345-471)
Volume 1, Book 8, Number 345:
Narrated Abu Dhar:
Allah's Apostle said, "While I was at Mecca the roof of my house was
opened and Gabriel descended, opened my chest, and washed it with Zamzam water. Then he brought a golden tray full of wisdom and faith and
having poured its contents into my chest, he closed it. Then he took my
hand and ascended with me to the nearest heaven, when I reached the
nearest heaven, Gabriel said to the gatekeeper of the heaven, 'Open (the
gate).' The gatekeeper asked, 'Who is it?' Gabriel answered: 'Gabriel.' He
asked, 'Is there anyone with you?' Gabriel replied, 'Yes, Muhammad I is with
me.' He asked, 'Has he been called?' Gabriel said, 'Yes.' So the gate was
opened and we went over the nearest heaven and there we saw a man
sitting with some people on his right and some on his left. When he looked
towards his right, he laughed and when he looked toward his left he wept.
Then he said, 'Welcome! O pious Prophet and pious son.' I asked Gabriel,
'Who is he?' He replied, 'He is Adam and the people on his right and left are
the souls of his offspring. Those on his right are the people of Paradise and
those on his left are the people of Hell and when he looks towards his right
he laughs and when he looks towards his left he weeps.'
Then he ascended with me till he reached the second heaven and he
(Gabriel) said to its gatekeeper, 'Open (the gate).' The gatekeeper said to
him the same as the gatekeeper of the first heaven had said and he opened
the gate. Anas said: "Abu Dhar added that the Prophet met Adam, Idris,
Moses, Jesus and Abraham, he (Abu Dhar) did not mention on which heaven
they were but he mentioned that he (the Prophet ) met Adarn on the
nearest heaven and Abraham on the sixth heaven. Anas said, "When Gabriel
along with the Prophet passed by Idris, the latter said, 'Welcome! O pious
Prophet and pious brother.' The Prophet asked, 'Who is he?' Gabriel replied,
'He is Idris." The Prophet added, "I passed by Moses and he said, 'Welcome!
O pious Prophet and pious brother.' I asked Gabriel, 'Who is he?' Gabriel
replied, 'He is Moses.' Then I passed by Jesus and he said, 'Welcome! O pious
brother and pious Prophet.' I asked, 'Who is he?' Gabriel replied, 'He is Jesus.
Then I passed by Abraham and he said, 'Welcome! O pious Prophet and
pious son.' I asked Gabriel, 'Who is he?' Gabriel replied, 'He is Abraham. The
Prophet added, 'Then Gabriel ascended with me to a place where I heard the
creaking of the pens." Ibn Hazm and Anas bin Malik said: The Prophet said,
"Then Allah enjoined fifty prayers on my followers when I returned with this
order of Allah, I passed by Moses who asked me, 'What has Allah enjoined
on your followers?' I replied, 'He has enjoined fifty prayers on them.' Moses
said, 'Go back to your Lord (and appeal for reduction) for your followers will
not be able to bear it.' (So I went back to Allah and requested for reduction)
and He reduced it to half. When I passed by Moses again and informed him
about it, he said, 'Go back to your Lord as your followers will not be able to
bear it.' So I returned to Allah and requested for further reduction and half
of it was reduced. I again passed by Moses and he said to me: 'Return to
your Lord, for your followers will not be able to bear it. So I returned to Allah
and He said, 'These are five prayers and they are all (equal to) fifty (in
reward) for My Word does not change.' I returned to Moses and he told me
to go back once again. I replied, 'Now I feel shy of asking my Lord again.'
Then Gabriel took me till we '' reached Sidrat-il-Muntaha (Lote tree of; the
utmost boundry) which was shrouded in colors, indescribable. Then I was
admitted into Paradise where I found small (tents or) walls (made) of pearls
and its earth was of musk."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 346:
Narrated 'Aisha:
the mother of believers: Allah enjoined the prayer when He enjoined it, it
was two Rakat only (in every prayer) both when in residence or on journey.
Then the prayers offered on journey remained the same, but (the Rakat of)
the prayers for non-travellers were increased.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 347:
Narrated Um 'Atiya:
We were ordered to bring out our menstruating women and veiled women
in the religious gatherings and invocation of Muslims on the two 'Id
festivals. These menstruating women were to keep away from their Musalla.
A woman asked, "O Allah's Apostle ' What about one who does not have a
veil?" He said, "Let her share the veil of her companion."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 348:
Narrated Muhammad bin Al-Munkadir:
Once Jabir prayed with his Izar tied to his back while his clothes were Lying
beside him on a wooden peg. Somebody asked him, "Do you offer your
prayer in a single Izar?" He replied, "I did so to show it to a fool like you. Had
anyone of us two garments in the life-time of the Prophet?"

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 349:
Narrated Muhammad bin Al Munkadir:
I saw Jabir bin 'Abdullah praying in a single garment and he said that he had
seen the Prophet praying in a single garment.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 350:
Narrated 'Umar bin Abi Salama:
The Prophet prayed in one garment and crossed its ends.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 351:
Narrated 'Umar bin Abi Salama:
I saw the Prophet offering prayers in a single garment in the house of UmSalama and he had crossed its ends around his shoulders.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 352:
Narrated 'Umar bin Abi Salama:
In the house of Um-Salama I saw Allah's Apostle offering prayers, wrapped
in a single garment around his body with its ends crossed round his
shoulders.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 353:
Narrated Abu Murra:
(the freed slave of Um Hani) Um Hani, the daughter of Abi Talib said, "I went
to Allah's Apostle in the year of the conquest of Mecca and found him taking
a bath and his daughter Fatima was screening him. I greeted him. He asked,
'Who is she?' I replied, 'I am Um Hani bint Abi Talib.' He said, 'Welcome! O
Um Hani.' When he finished his bath he stood up and prayed eight Rak at
while wearing a single garment wrapped round his body and when he
finished I said, 'O Allah's Apostle ! My brother has told me that he will kill a
person whom I gave shelter and that person is so and so the son of Hubaira.'
The Prophet said, 'We shelter the person whom you have sheltered.' " Um
Ham added, "And that was before noon (Duha)."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 354:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A person asked Allah's Apostle about the offering of the prayer in a single
garment. Allah's Apostle replied, "Has every one of you got two garments?"

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 355:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "None of you should offer prayer in a single garment that
does not cover the shoulders."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 356:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever prays in a single garment must cross its ends
(over the shoulders)."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 357:
Narrated Said bin Al-Harith:
I asked Jabir bin 'Abdullah about praying in a single garment. He said, "I
travelled with the Prophet during some of his journeys, and I came to him at
night for some purpose and I found him praying. At that time, I was wearing
a single garment with which I covered my shoulders and prayed by his side.
When he finished the prayer, he asked, 'O Jabir! What has brought you
here?' I told him what I wanted. When I finished, he asked, 'O Jabir! What is
this garment which I have seen and with which you covered your shoulders?'
I replied, 'It is a (tight) garment.' He said, 'If the garment is large enough,
wrap it round the body (covering the shoulders) and if it is tight (too short)
then use it as an Izar (tie it around your waist only.)' "

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 358:
Narrated Sahl:
The men used to pray with the Prophet with their Izars tied around their
necks as boys used to do; therefore the Prophet told the women not to raise
their heads till the men sat down straight (while praying).
Volume 1, Book 8, Number 359:
Narrated Mughira bin Shu'ba:
Once I was traveling with the Prophet and he said, "O Mughira! take this
container of water." I took it and Allah's Apostle went far away till he
disappeared. He answered the call of nature and was wearing a Syrian cloak.
He tried to take out his hands from its sleeve but it was very tight so he took
out his hands from under it. I poured water and he performed ablution like
that for prayers and passed his wet hands over his Khuff (leather socks) and
then prayed .

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 360:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
While Allah's Apostle was carrying stones (along) with the people of Mecca
for (the building of) the Ka'ba wearing an Izar (waist-sheet cover), his uncle
Al-'Abbas said to him, "O my nephew! (It would be better) if you take off
your Izar and put it over your shoulders underneath the stones." So he took
off his Izar and put it over his shoulders, but he fell unconscious and since
then he had never been seen naked.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 361:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man stood up and asked the Prophet about praying in a single garment.
The Prophet said, "Has every one of you two garments?" A man put a similar
question to 'Umar on which he replied, "When Allah makes you wealthier
then you should clothe yourself properly during prayers. Otherwise one can
pray with an Izar and a Rida' (a sheet covering the upper part of the body.)
Izar and a shirt, Izar and a Qaba', trousers and a Rida, trousers and a shirt or
trousers and a Qaba', Tubban and a Qaba' or Tubban and a shirt." (The
narrator added, "I think that he also said a Tubban and a Rida. ")
Volume 1, Book 8, Number 362:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
A person asked Allah's Apostle, "What should a Muhrim wear?" He replied,
"He should not wear shirts, trousers, a burnus (a hooded cloak), or clothes
which are stained with saffron or Wars (a kind of perfume). Whoever does
not find a sandal to wear can wear Khuffs, but these should be cut short so
as not to cover the ankles.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 363:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle forbade Ishtimal-As-Samma' (wrapping one's body with a
garment so that one cannot raise its end or take one's hand out of it). He
also forbade Al-Ihtiba' (sitting on buttocks with knees close to abdomen and
feet apart with the hands circling the knees) while wrapping oneself with a
single garment, without having a part of it over the private parts.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 364:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet forbade two kinds of sales i.e. Al-Limais and An-Nibadh (the
former is a kind of sale in which the deal is completed if the buyer touches a
thing, without seeing or checking it properly and the latter is a kind of a sale
in which the deal is completed when the seller throws a thing towards the
buyer giving him no opportunity to see, touch or check it) and (the Prophet
forbade) also Ishtimal-As-Samma' and Al-Ihtiba' in a single garment.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 365:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
On the Day of Nahr (10th of Dhul-Hijja, in the year prior to the last Hajj of the
Prophet when Abu Bakr was the leader of the pilgrims in that Hajj) Abu Bakr
sent me along with other announcers to Mina to make a public
announcement: "No pagan is allowed to perform Hajj after this year and no
naked person is allowed to perform the Tawaf around the Ka'ba. Then
Allah's Apostle sent 'All to read out the Surat Bara'a (At-Tauba) to the
people; so he made the announcement along with us on the day of Nahr in
Mina: "No pagan is allowed to perform Hajj after this year and no naked
person is allowed to perform the Tawaf around the Ka'ba."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 366:
Narrated Muhammad bin Al-Munkadir:
I went to Jabir bin 'Abdullah and he was praying wrapped in a garment and
his Rida was Lying beside him. When he finished the prayers, I said "O
'Abdullah! You pray (in a single garment) while your Rida' is lying beside
you." He replied, "Yes, I did it intentionally so that the ignorant ones like you
might see me. I saw the Prophet praying like this. "

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 367:
Narrated 'Abdul 'Aziz:
Anas said, 'When Allah's Apostle invaded Khaibar, we offered the Fajr prayer
there yearly in the morning) when it was still dark. The Prophet rode and
Abu Talha rode too and I was riding behind Abu Talha. The Prophet passed
through the lane of Khaibar quickly and my knee was touching the thigh of
the Prophet . He uncovered his thigh and I saw the whiteness of the thigh of
the Prophet. When he entered the town, he said, 'Allahu Akbar! Khaibar is
ruined. Whenever we approach near a (hostile) nation (to fight) then evil
will be the morning of those who have been warned.' He repeated this
thrice. The people came out for their jobs and some of them said,
'Muhammad (has come).' (Some of our companions added, "With his
army.") We conquered Khaibar, took the captives, and the booty was
collected. Dihya came and said, 'O Allah's Prophet! Give me a slave girl from
the captives.' The Prophet said, 'Go and take any slave girl.' He took Safiya
bint Huyai. A man came to the Prophet and said, 'O Allah's Apostles! You
gave Safiya bint Huyai to Dihya and she is the chief mistress of the tribes of
Quraiza and An-Nadir and she befits none but you.' So the Prophet said,
'Bring him along with her.' So Dihya came with her and when the Prophet
saw her, he said to Dihya, 'Take any slave girl other than her from the
captives.' Anas added: The Prophet then manumitted her and married her."
Thabit asked Anas, "O Abu Hamza! What did the Prophet pay her (as
Mahr)?" He said, "Her self was her Mahr for he manumitted her and then
married her." Anas added, "While on the way, Um Sulaim dressed her for
marriage (ceremony) and at night she sent her as a bride to the Prophet . So
the Prophet was a bridegroom and he said, 'Whoever has anything (food)
should bring it.' He spread out a leather sheet (for the food) and some
brought dates and others cooking butter. (I think he (Anas) mentioned AsSawTq). So they prepared a dish of Hais (a kind of meal). And that was
Walrma (the marriage banquet) of Allah's Apostle ."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 368:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle used to offer the Fajr prayer and some believing women
covered with their veiling sheets used to attend the Fajr prayer with him and
then they would return to their homes unrecognized .

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 369:
Narrated 'Aisha:
the Prophet prayed in a Khamisa (a square garment) having marks. During
the prayer, he looked at its marks. So when he finished the prayer he said,
"Take this Khamisa of mine to Abu Jahm and get me his Inbijaniya (a woolen
garment without marks) as it (the Khamisa) has diverted my attention from
the prayer."
Volume 1, Book 8, Number 370:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, 'I was looking at its (Khamisa's) marks during the prayers
and I was afraid that it may put me in trial (by taking away my attention).

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 371:
Narrated Anas:
'Aisha had a Qiram (a thin marked woolen curtain) with which he had
screened one side of her home. The Prophet said, "Take away this Qiram of
yours, as its pictures are still displayed in front of me during my prayer (i.e.
they divert my attention from the prayer)."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 372:
Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir:
The Prophet was given a silken Farruj as a present. He wore it while praying.
When he had finished his prayer, he took it off violently as if with a strong
aversion to it and said, "It is not the dress of Allah-fearing pious people."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 373:
Narrated Abu Juhaifa:
I saw Allah's Apostle in a red leather tent and I saw Bilal taking the
remaining water with which the Prophet had performed ablution. I saw the
people taking the utilized water impatiently and whoever got some of it
rubbed it on his body and those who could not get any took the moisture
from the others' hands. Then I saw Bilal carrying an 'Anza (a spear-headed
stick) which he planted in the ground. The Prophet came out tucking up his
red cloak, and led the people in prayer and offered two Rakat (facing th
Ka'ba) taking 'Anza as a Sutra for his prayer. I saw the people and animals
passing in front of him beyond the 'Anza.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 374:
Narrated Abu Hazim:
Sahl bin Sa'd was asked about the (Prophet's) pulpit as to what thing it was
made of? Sahl replied: "None remains alive amongst the people, who knows
about it better than I. It was made of tamarisk (wood) of the forest. So and
so, the slave of so and so prepared it for Allah's Apostle . When it was
constructed and place (in the Mosque), Allah's Apostle stood on it facing the
Qibla and said 'Allahu Akbar', and the people stood behind him (and led the
people in prayer). He recited and bowed and the people bowed behind him.
Then he raised his head and stepped back, got down and prostrated on the
ground and then he again ascended the pulpit, recited, bowed, raised his
head and stepped back, got down and prostrate on the ground. So, this is
what I know about the pulpit."
Ahmad bin Hanbal said, "As the Prophet was at a higher level than the
people, there is no harm according to the above-mentioned Hadith if the
Imam is at a higher level than his followers during the prayers."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 375:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Once Allah's Apostle fell off a horse and his leg or shoulder got injured. He
swore that he would not go to his wives for one month and he stayed in a
Mashruba (attic room) having stairs made of date palm trunks. So his
companions came to visit him, and he led them in prayer sitting, whereas his
companions were standing. When he finished the prayer, he said, "Imam is
meant to be followed, so when he says 'Allahu Akbar,' say 'Allahu Akbar' and
when he bows, bow and when he prostrates, prostrate and if he prays
standing pray, standing. After the 29th day the Prophet came down (from
the attic room) and the people asked him, "O Allah's Apostle! You swore
that you will not go to your wives for one month." He said, "The month is 29
days."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 376:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Shaddad:
Maimuna said, "Allah's Apostle was praying while I was in my menses, sitting
beside him and sometimes his clothes would touch me during his
prostration." Maimuna added, "He prayed on a Khumra (a small mat
sufficient just for the face and the hands while prostrating during prayers).

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 377:
Narrated Ishaq:
Anas bin Malik said, "My grand-mother Mulaika invited Allah's Apostle for a
meal which she herself had prepared. He ate from it and said, 'Get up! I will
lead you in the prayer.' " Anas added, "I took my Hasir, washed it with water
as it had become dark because of long use and Allah's Apostle stood on it.
The orphan (Damira or Ruh) and I aligned behind him and the old lady
(Mulaika) stood behind us. Allah's Apostle led us in the prayer and offered
two Rak'at and then left."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 378:
Narrated Maimuna:
Allah's Apostle used to pray on Khumra.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 379:
Narrated Abu Salama:
'Aisha the wife of the Prophet said, "I used to sleep in front of Allah's
Apostle and my legs were opposite his Qibla and in prostration he pushed
my legs and I withdrew then and when he stood, I stretched them.' 'Aisha
added, "In those days the houses were without lights."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 380:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah Apostle prayed while I was lying like a dead body on his family bed
between him and his Qibla.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 381:
Narrated 'Urwa:
The Prophet prayed while 'Aisha was lying between him and his Qibla on the
bed on which they used to sleep.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 382:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
We used to pray with the Prophet and some of us used to place the ends of
their clothes at the place of prostration because of scorching heat.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 383:
Narrated Abu Maslama:
Said bin Yazid Al-Azdi: I asked Anas bin Malik whether the Prophet had ever,
prayed with his shoes on. He replied "Yes."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 384:
Narrated Ibrahim:
Hammam bin Al-Harith said, "I saw Jarir bin 'Abdullah urinating. Then he
performed ablution and passed his (wet) hands over his Khuffs, stood up
and prayed. He was asked about it. He replied that he had seen the Prophet
doing the same." They approved of this narration as Jarir was one of those
who embraced Islam very late.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 385l:
Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba:
I helped the Prophet in performing ablution and he passed his wet hands
over his Khuffs and prayed.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 385u:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Malik:
Ibn Buhaina, "When the Prophet prayed, he used to separate his arms from
his body so widely that the whiteness of his armpits was visible."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 386:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever prays like us and faces our Quibla and eats
our slaughtered animals is a Muslim and is under Allah's and His Apostle's
protection. So do not betray Allah by betraying those who are in His
protection."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 387:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "I have been ordered to fight the people till they say:
'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah.' And if they say so, pray like
our prayers, face our Qibla and slaughter as we slaughter, then their blood
and property will be sacred to us and we will not interfere with them except
legally and their reckoning will be with Allah." Narrated Maimun ibn Siyah
that he asked Anas bin Malik, "O Abu Hamza! What makes the life and
property of a person sacred?" He replied, "Whoever says, 'None has the
right to be worshipped but Allah', faces our Qibla during the prayers, prays
like us and eats our slaughtered animal, then he is a Muslim, and has got the
same rights and obligations as other Muslims have."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 388:
Narrated Abu Aiyub Al-Ansari:
The Prophet said, "While defecating, neither face nor turn your back to the
Qibla but face either east or west." Abu Aiyub added. "When we arrived in
Sham we came across some lavatories facing the Qibla; therefore we turned
ourselves while using them and asked for Allah's forgiveness."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 389:
Narrated 'Amr bin Dmar:
I asked Ibn 'Umar, "Can a person who has performed the Tawaf around the
Ka'ba for 'Umra but has not performed the (Sa'i) Tawaf of Safa and Marwa,
have a sexual relation with his wife?" Ibn 'Umar replied "When the Prophet
reached Mecca he performed the Tawaf around the Ka'ba
(circumambulated it seven times) and offered a two-Rak'at prayer (at the
place) behind the station (of Abraham) and then performed the Tawaf (Sa'i)
of Safa and Marwa, and verily in Allah's Apostle you have a good example."
Then we put the same question to Jabir bin 'Abdullah and he too replied,
"He should not go near his wife (for sexual relation) till he has finished the
Tawaf of Safa and Marwa."
Volume 1, Book 8, Number 390:
Narrated Mujahid:
Someone came to Ibn 'Umar and said, "Here is Allah's Apostle entering the
Ka'ba." Ibn 'Umar said, "I went there but the Prophet had come out of the
Ka'ba and I found Bilal standing between its two doors. I asked Bilal, 'Did the
Prophet pray in the Ka'ba?' Bilal replied, 'Yes, he prayed two Rakat between
the two pillars which are to your left on entering the Ka'ba. Then Allah's
Apostle came out and offered a two-Rak'at prayer facing the Ka'ba.' "

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 391:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
When the Prophet entered the Ka'ba, he invoked Allah in each and every
side of it and did not pray till he came out of it, and offered a two-Rak'at
prayer facing the Ka'ba and said, "This is the Qibla."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 392:
Narrated Bara' bin 'Azib:
Allah's Apostle prayed facing Baitul-Maqdis for sixteen or seventeen months
but he loved to face the Ka'ba (at Mecca) so Allah revealed: "Verily, We have
seen the turning of your face to the heaven!" (2:144) So the Prophet faced
the Ka'ba and the fools amongst the people namely "the Jews" said, "What
has turned them from their Qibla (Bait-ul-Maqdis) which they formerly
observed"" (Allah revealed): "Say: 'To Allah belongs the East and the West.
He guides whom he will to a straight path'." (2:142) A man prayed with the
Prophet (facing the Ka'ba) and went out. He saw some of the Ansar praying
the 'Asr prayer with their faces towards Bait-ul-Maqdis, he said, "I bear
witness that I prayed with Allah's Apostle facing the Ka'ba." So all the
people turned their faces towards the Ka'ba.
Volume 1, Book 8, Number 393:
Narrated Jabir:
Allah's Apostle used to pray (optional, non-obligatory prayer) while riding on
his mount (Rahila) wherever it turned, and whenever he wanted to pray the
compulsory prayer he dismounted and prayed facing the Qibla.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 394:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet prayed (and the subnarrator Ibrahim said, "I do not know
whether he prayed more or less than usual"), and when he had finished the
prayers he was asked, "O Allah's Apostle! Has there been any change in the
prayers?" He said, "What is it?' The people said, "You have prayed so much
and so much." So the Prophet bent his legs, faced the Qibla and performed
two prostrations (of Sahu) and finished his prayers with Tasiim (by turning
his face to right and left saying: 'As-Salamu'Alaikum-Warahmat-ullah'). When
he turned his face to us he said, "If there had been anything changed in the
prayer, surely I would have informed you but I am a human being like you
and liable to forget like you. So if I forget remind me and if anyone of you is
doubtful about his prayer, he should follow what he thinks to be correct and
complete his prayer accordingly and finish it and do two prostrations (of
Sahu)."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 395:
Narrated 'Umar (bin Al-Khattab):
My Lord agreed with me in three things:
1. I said,"O Allah's Apostle, I wish we took the station of Abraham as our
praying place (for some of our prayers). So came the Divine Inspiration: And
take you (people) the station of Abraham as a place of prayer (for some of
your prayers e.g. two Rakat of Tawaf of Ka'ba)". (2.125)
2. And as regards the (verse of) the veiling of the women, I said, 'O Allah's
Apostle! I wish you ordered your wives to cover themselves from the men
because good and bad ones talk to them.' So the verse of the veiling of the
women was revealed.
3. Once the wives of the Prophet made a united front against the Prophet
and I said to them, 'It may be if he (the Prophet) divorced you, (all) that his
Lord (Allah) will give him instead of you wives better than you.' So this verse
(the same as I had said) was revealed." (66.5).

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 396:
Narrated Anas:
as above (395).

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 397:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
While the people were offering the Fajr prayer at Quba (near Medina),
someone came to them and said: "It has been revealed to Allah's Apostle
tonight, and he has been ordered to pray facing the Ka'ba." So turn your
faces to the Ka'ba. Those people were facing Sham (Jerusalem) so they
turned their faces towards Ka'ba (at Mecca).

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 398:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
"Once the Prophet offered five Rakat in Zuhr prayer. He was asked, "Is there
an increase in the prayer?" The Prophet said, "And what is it?" They said,
"You have prayed five Rakat.' So he bent his legs and performed two
prostrations (of Sahu).
Volume 1, Book 8, Number 399:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet saw some sputum in the direction of the Qibla (on the wall of
the mosque) and he disliked that and the sign of disgust was apparent from
his face. So he got up and scraped it off with his hand and said, "Whenever
anyone of you stands for the prayer, he is speaking in private to his Lord or
his Lord is between him and his Qibla. So, none of you should spit in the
direction of the Qibla but one can spit to the left or under his foot." The
Prophet then took the corner of his sheet and spat in it and folded it and
said, "Or you can do like this. "

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 400:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: Allah's Apostle saw sputum on the wall of the
mosque in the direction of the Qibla and scraped it off. He faced the people
and said, "Whenever any one of you is praying, he should not spit in front of
him because in the prayer Allah is in front of him."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 401:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the mother of faithful believers) Allah's Apostle saw some nasal secretions,
expectoration or sputum on the wall of the mosque in the direction of the
Qibla and scraped it off.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 402:
Narrated Abd Huraira and Abu Said:
Allah's Apostle saw some expectoration on the wall of the mosque; he took
gravel and scraped it off and said, "If anyone of you wanted to spit he
should neither spit in front of him nor on his right but he could spit either on
his left or under his left foot."
Volume 1, Book 8, Number 403:
Narrated Abd Huraira and Abu Sa'id:
Allah's Apostle saw some expectoration on the wall of the mosque; he took
gravel and scraped it off and said, "If anyone of you wanted to spit, he
should neither spit in front of him nor on his right but could spit either on his
left or under his left foot."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 404:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "None of you should spit in front or on his right but he
could spit either on his left or under his foot."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 405:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "A faithful believer while in prayer is speaking in private to
his Lord, so he should neither spit in front of him nor to his right side but he
could spit either on his left or under his foot."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 406:
Narrated Abu Said:
The Prophet saw sputum on (the wall of) the mosque in the direction of the
Qibla and scraped it off with gravel. Then he forbade Spitting in front or on
the right, but allowed it on one's left or under one's left foot.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 407:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "Spitting in the mosque is a sin and its expiation is to bury
it."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 408:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Prophet said, "If anyone of you stands for prayer, he should not spit in front
of him because in prayer he is speaking in private to Allah and he should not
spit on his right as there is an angel, but he can spit either on his left or
under his left foot and bury it (i.e. expectoration)."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 409:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet saw expectoration (on the wall of the mosque) in the direction
of the Qibla and scraped it off with his hand. It seemed that he disliked it
and the sign of disgust was apparent from his face. He said, "If anyone of
you stands for the prayer, he is speaking in private to his Lord, (or) his Lord
is between him and his Qibla, therefore he should not spit towards his Qibla,
but he could spit either on his left or under his foot." Then he took the
corner of his sheet and spat in it, folded it and said, "Or do like this."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 410:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Do you consider or see that my face is towards the
Qibla? By Allah, neither your submissiveness nor your bowing is hidden from
me, surely I see you from my back."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 411
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet led us in a prayer and then got up on the pulpit and said, "In
your prayer and bowing, I certainly see you from my back as I see you (while
looking at you.)"

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 412:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle ordered for a horse race; the trained horses were to run
from a place called Al-Hafya' to Thaniyat Al-Wada' and the horses which
were not trained were to run from Al-Thaniya to the Masjid (mosque of)
Bani Zuraiq. The sub narrator added: Ibn Umar was one of those who took
part in the race.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 413:
Narrated Anas:
Some goods came to Allah's Apostle from Bahrain. The Prophet ordered the
people to spread them in the mosque --it was the biggest amount of goods
Allah's Apostle had ever received. He left for prayer and did not even look at
it. After finishing the prayer, he sat by those goods and gave from those to
everybody he saw. Al-'Abbas came to him and said, "O Allah's Apostle! give
me (something) too, because I gave ransom for myself and 'Aqil" Allah's
Apostle told him to take. So he stuffed his garment with it and tried to carry
it away but he failed to do so. He said, "O Allah's Apostle! Order someone to
help me in lifting it." The Prophet refused. He then said to the Prophet: Will
you please help me to lift it?" Allah's Apostle refused. Then Al-'Abbas threw
some of it and tried to lift it (but failed). He again said, "O Allah's Apostle
Order someone to help me to lift it." He refused. Al-'Abbas then said to the
Prophet: "Will you please help me to lift it?" He again refused. Then Al'Abbas threw some of it, and lifted it on his shoulders and went away.
Allah's Apostle kept on watching him till he disappeared from his sight and
was astonished at his greediness. Allah's Apostle did not get up till the last
coin was distributed.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 414:
Narrated Anas:
I found the Prophet in the mosque along with some people. He said to me,
"Did Abu Talha send you?" I said, "Yes". He said, "For a meal?" I said, "Yes."
Then he said to his companions, "Get up." They set out and I was ahead of
them.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 415:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:
A man said, "O Allah's Apostle! If a man finds another man with his wife,
(committing adultery) should the husband kill him?" Later on I saw them
(the man and his wife) doing Lian in the mosque.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 416:
Narrated 'Itban bin Malik:
The Prophet came to my house and said, "Where do you like me to pray?" I
pointed to a place. The Prophet then said, "Allahu Akbar", and we aligned
behind him and he offered a two-Rak'at prayer.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 417:
Narrated 'Itban bin Malik:
who was one of the companions of Allah's Apostle and one of the Ansar's
who took part in the battle of Badr: I came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O
Allah's Apostle I have weak eyesight and I lead my people in prayers. When
it rains the water flows in the valley between me and my people so I cannot
go to their mosque to lead them in prayer. O Allah's Apostle! I wish you
would come to my house and pray in it so that I could take that place as a
Musalla. Allah's Apostle said. "Allah willing, I will do so." Next day after the
sun rose high, Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr came and Allah's Apostle asked
for permission to enter. I gave him permission and he did not sit on entering
the house but said to me, "Where do you like me to pray?" I pointed to a
place in my house. So Allah's Apostle stood there and said, 'Allahu Akbar',
and we all got up and aligned behind him and offered a two-Rak'at prayer
and ended it with Taslim. We requested him to stay for a meal called
"Khazira" which we had prepared for him. Many members of our family
gathered in the house and one of them said, "Where is Malik bin AlDukhaishin or Ibn Al-Dukhshun?" One of them replied, "He is a hypocrite and
does not love Allah and His Apostle." Hearing that, Allah's Apostle said, "Do
not say so. Haven't you seen that he said, 'None has the right to be
worshipped but Allah' for Allah's sake only?" He said, "Allah and His Apostle
know better. We have seen him helping and advising hypocrites."
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah has forbidden the (Hell) fire for those who say,
'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah' for Allah's sake only."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 418:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to start every thing from the right (for good things)
whenever it was possible in all his affairs; for example: in washing, combing
or wearing shoes.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 419:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Um Habiba and Um Salama mentioned about a church they had seen in
Ethiopia in which there were pictures. They told the Prophet about it, on
which he said, "If any religious man dies amongst those people they would
build a place of worship at his grave and make these pictures in it. They will
be the worst creature in the sight of Allah on the Day of Resurrection."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 420:
Narrated Anas:
When the Prophet arrived Medina he dismounted at 'Awali-i-Medina
amongst a tribe called Banu 'Amr bin 'Auf. He stayed there For fourteen
nights. Then he sent for Bani An-Najjar and they came armed with their
swords. As if I am looking (just now) as the Prophet was sitting over his
Rahila (Mount) with Abu Bakr riding behind him and all Banu An-Najjar
around him till he dismounted at the courtyard of Abu Aiyub's house. The
Prophet loved to pray wherever the time for the prayer was due even at
sheep-folds. Later on he ordered that a mosque should be built and sent for
some people of Banu-An-Najjar and said, "O Banu An-Najjar! Suggest to me
the price of this (walled) piece of land of yours." They replied, "No! By Allah!
We do not demand its price except from Allah." Anas added: There were
graves of pagans in it and some of it was unleveled and there were some
date-palm trees in it. The Prophet ordered that the graves of the pagans be
dug out and the unleveled land be level led and the date-palm trees be cut
down . (So all that was done). They aligned these cut date-palm trees
towards the Qibla of the mosque (as a wall) and they also built two stone
side-walls (of the mosque). His companions brought the stones while
reciting some poetic verses. The Prophet was with them and he kept on
saying, "There is no goodness except that of the Hereafter, O Allah! So
please forgive the Ansars and the emigrants. "

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 421:
Narrated Abu Al-Taiyah:
Anas said, "The Prophet prayed in the sheep fold." Later on I heard him
saying, "He prayed in the sheep folds before the construction of the,
mosque."
Volume 1, Book 8, Number 422:
Narrated Nafi:
"I saw Ibn 'Umar praying while taking his camel as a Sutra in front of him and
he said, "I saw the Prophet doing the same."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 423:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
The sun eclipsed and Allah's Apostle offered the eclipse prayer and said, "I
have been shown the Hellfire (now) and I never saw a worse and horrible
sight than the sight I have seen today."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 424:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet had said, "Offer some of your prayers (Nawafil) at home, and
do not take your houses as graves."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 425:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Do not enter (the places) of these people where
Allah's punishment had fallen unless you do so weeping. If you do not weep,
do not enter (the places of these people) because Allah's curse and
punishment which fell upon them may fall upon you."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 426:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Um Salama told Allah's Apostle about a church which she had seen in
Ethiopia and which was called Mariya. She told him about the pictures which
she had seen in it. Allah's Apostle said, "If any righteous pious man dies
amongst them, they would build a place of worship at his grave and make
these pictures in it; they are the worst creatures in the sight of Allah."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 427:
Narrated 'Aisha and 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
When the last moment of the life of Allah's Apostle came he started putting
his 'Khamisa' on his face and when he felt hot and short of breath he took it
off his face and said, "May Allah curse the Jews and Christians for they built
the places of worship at the graves of their Prophets." The Prophet was
warning (Muslims) of what those had done.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 428:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "May Allah's curse be on the Jews for they built the
places of worship at the graves of their Prophets."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 429:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "I have been given five things which were not given to
any amongst the Prophets before me. These are:
1. Allah made me victorious by awe (by His frightening my enemies) for a
distance of one month's journey.
2. The earth has been made for me (and for my followers) a place for
praying and a thing to perform Tayammum. Therefore my followers can pray
wherever the time of a prayer is due.
3. The booty has been made Halal (lawful) for me (and was not made so for
anyone else).
4. Every Prophet used to be sent to his nation exclusively but I have been
sent 1o all mankind.
5. I have been given the right of intercession (on the Day of Resurrection.)

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 430:
Narrated 'Aisha:
There was a black slave girl belonging to an 'Arab tribe and they manumitted
her but she remained with them. The slave girl said, "Once one of their girls
(of that tribe) came out wearing a red leather scarf decorated with precious
stones. It fell from her or she placed it somewhere. A kite passed by that
place, saw it Lying there and mistaking it for a piece of meat, flew away with
it. Those people searched for it but they did not find it. So they accused me
of stealing it and started searching me and even searched my private parts."
The slave girl further said, "By Allah! while I was standing (in that state) with
those people, the same kite passed by them and dropped the red scarf and
it fell amongst them. I told them, 'This is what you accused me of and I was
innocent and now this is it.' " 'Aisha added: That slave girl came to Allah's
Apostle and embraced Islam. She had a tent or a small room with a low roof
in the mosque. Whenever she called on me, she had a talk with me and
whenever she sat with me, she would recite the following: "The day of the
scarf (band) was one of the wonders of our Lord, verily He rescued me from
the disbelievers' town. 'Aisha added: "Once I asked her, 'What is the matter
with you? Whenever you sit with me, you always recite these poetic verses.'
On that she told me the whole story. "

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 431:
Narrated Naf'a:
'Abdullah bin 'Umar said: I used to sleep in the mosque of the Prophet while
I was young and unmarried.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 432:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:
Allah's Apostle went to Fatima's house but did not find 'Ali there. So he
asked, "Where is your cousin?" She replied, "There was something between
us and he got angry with me and went out. He did not sleep (mid-day nap) in
the house." Allah's Apostle asked a person to look for him. That person
came and said, "O Allah's Apostle! He (Ali) is sleeping in the mosque." Allah's
Apostle went there and 'Ali was lying. His upper body cover had fallen down
to one side of his body and he was covered with dust. Allah's Apostle
started cleaning the dust from him saying: "Get up! O Aba Turab. Get up! O
Aba Turab (literally means: O father of dust).

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 433:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I saw seventy of As-Suffa men and none of them had a Rida' (a garment
covering the upper part of the body). They had either Izars (only) or sheets
which they tied round their necks. Some of these sheets reached the middle
of their legs and some reached their heels and they used to gather them
with their hands lest their private parts should become naked.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 434:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
I went to the Prophet in the mosque (the sub-narrator Mas'ar thought that
Jabir had said, "In the forenoon.") He ordered me to pray two Rakat. He
owed me some money and he repaid it to me and gave more than what was
due to me.
Volume 1, Book 8, Number 435:
Narrated Abu Qatada Al-Aslami:
Allah's Apostle said, "If anyone of you enters a mosque, he should pray two
Rakat before sitting."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 436:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The angels keep on asking Allah's forgiveness for
anyone of you, as long as he is at his Mu,salla (praying place) and he does
not pass wind (Hadath). They say, 'O Allah! Forgive him, O Allah! be Merciful
to him."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 437:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
In the life-time of Allah's Apostle the mosque was built of adobes, its roof of
the leaves of date-palms and its pillars of the stems of date-palms. Abu Bakr
did not alter it. 'Umar expanded it on the same pattern as it was in the
lifetime of Allah's Apostle by using adobes, leaves of date-palms and
changing the pillars into wooden ones. 'Uthman changed it by expanding it
to a great extent and built its walls with engraved stones and lime and made
its pillars of engraved stones and its roof of teak wood.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 438:
Narrated 'Ikrima:
Ibn 'Abbas said to me and to his son 'Ali, "Go to Abu Sa'id and listen to what
he narrates." So we went and found him in a garden looking after it. He
picked up his Rida', wore it and sat down and started narrating till the topi
of the construction of the mosque reached. He said, "We were carrying one
adobe at a time while 'Ammar was carrying two. The Prophet saw him and
started removing the dust from his body and said, "May Allah be Merciful to
'Ammar. He will be inviting them (i.e. his murderers, the rebellious group) to
Paradise and they will invite him to Hell-fire." 'Ammar said, "I seek refuge
with Allah from affliction."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 439:
Narrated Sahl:
Allah's Apostle sent someone to a woman telling her to "Order her slave,
carpenter, to prepare a wooden pulpit for him to sit on."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 440:
Narrated Jabir:
A woman said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall I get something constructed for you
to sit on as I have a slave who is a carpenter?" He replied, "Yes, if you like."
So she had that pulpit constructed.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 441:
Narrated 'Ubdaidullah Al-Khaulani:
I heard 'Uthman bin 'Affan saying, when people argued too much about his
intention to reconstruct the mosque of Allah's Apostle, "You have talked
too much. I heard the Prophet saying, 'Whoever built a mosque, (Bukair
thought that 'Asim, another subnarrator, added, "Intending Allah's
Pleasure"), Allah would build for him a similar place in Paradise.' "

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 442:
Narrated 'Amr:
I heard Jabir bin 'Abdullah saying, "A man passed through the mosque
carrying arrows. Allah's Apostle said to him, 'Hold them by their heads.' "

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 443:
Narrated Abu Burda bin 'Abdulla:
(on the authority of his father) The Prophet said, "Whoever passes through
our mosques or markets with arrows should hold them by their heads lest
he should injure a Muslim."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 444:
Narrated Hassan bin Thabit Al-Ansari:
I asked Abu Huraira "By Allah! Tell me the truth whether you heard the
Prophet saying, 'O Hassan! Reply on behalf of Allah's Apostle. O Allah! Help
him with the Holy Spirit." Abu Huraira said, "Yes . "

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 445:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Once I saw Allah's Apostle at the door of my house while some Ethiopians
were playing in the mosque (displaying their skill with spears). Allah's
Apostle was screening me with his Rida' so as to enable me to see their
display. ('Urwa said that 'Aisha said, "I saw the Prophet and the Ethiopians
were playing with their spears.")

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 446:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Barira came to seek my help regarding her manumission. I told herself you
like I would pay your price to your masters but your Al-Wala(1) would be for
me." Her masters said, "If you like, you can pay what remains (of the price of
her manumission), (Sufyan the sub-narrator once said), or if you like you can
manumit her, but her (inheritance) Al-Wala would be for us. "When Allah's
Apostle came, I spoke to him about it. He said, "Buy her and manumit her.
No doubt Al-Wala(1) is for the manumitted." Then Allah's Apostle stood on
the pulpit (or Allah's Apostle ascended the pulpit as Sufyan once said), and
said, "What about some people who impose conditions which are not
present in Allah's Book (Laws)? Whoever imposes conditions which are not
in Allah's Book (Laws), his conditions will be invalid even if he imposed them
a hundred times."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 447:
Narrated Ka'b:
In the mosque l asked Ibn Abi Hadrad to pay the debts which he owed to me
and our voices grew louder. Allah's Apostle heard that while he was in his
house. So he came to us raising the curtain of his room and said, "O Ka'b!" I
replied, "Labaik, O Allah's Apostle!" He said, "O Ka'b! reduce your debt to
one half," gesturing with his hand. I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have done so."
Then Allah's Apostle said (to Ibn Abi Hadrad), "Get up and pay the debt to
him."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 448:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A black man or a black woman used to sweep the mosque and he or she
died. The Prophet asked about her (or him). He was told that she (or he) had
died. He said, "Why did you not inform me? Show me his grave (or her
grave)." So he went to her (his) grave and offered her (his) funeral prayer."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 449:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When the verses of Surat "Al-Baqara"' about the usury Riba were revealed,
the Prophet went to the mosque and recited them in front of the people
and then banned the trade of alcohol.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 450f:
Narrated Abu Rafi:
Abu Huraira said, "A man or a woman used to clean the mosque." (A subnarrator said, 'Most probably a woman..') Then he narrated the Hadith of
the Prophet

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 450m:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
"The Prophet said, "Last night a big demon (afreet) from the Jinns came to
me and wanted to interrupt my prayers (or said something similar) but Allah
enabled me to overpower him. I wanted to fasten him to one of the pillars
of the mosque so that all of you could See him in the morning but I
remembered the statement of my brother Solomon (as stated in Quran): My
Lord! Forgive me and bestow on me a kingdom such as shall not belong to
anybody after me (38.35)." The sub narrator Rauh said, "He (the demon)
was dismissed humiliated."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 451:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet sent some horsemen to Najd and they brought a man called
Thumama bin Uthal from Bani Hanifa. They fastened him to one of the pillars
of the mosque. The Prophet came and ordered them to release him. He
went to a (garden of) date-palms near the mosque, took a bath and entered
the, mosque again and said, "None has the right to be worshipped but Allah
an Muhammad is His Apostle (i.e. he embraced Islam)."
Volume 1, Book 8, Number 452:
Narrated 'Aisha:
On the day of Al-Khandaq (battle of the Trench' the medial arm vein of Sa'd
bin Mu'ad was injured and the Prophet pitched a tent in the mosque to look
after him. There was another tent for Banu Ghaffar in the mosque and the
blood started flowing from Sa'd's tent to the tent of Bani Ghaffar. They
shouted, "O occupants of the tent! What is coming from you to us?" They
found that Sa'd' wound was bleeding profusely and Sa'd died in his tent.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 453:
Narrated Um Salama:
I complained to Allah's Apostle that I was sick. He told me to perform the
Tawaf behind the people while riding. So I did so and Allah's Apostle was
praying beside the Ka'ba and reciting the Sura starting with "Wat-tur-waKitabinmastur."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 454:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Two of the companions of the Prophet departed from him on a dark night
and were led by two lights like lamps (going in front of them from Allah as a
miracle) lighting the way in front of them, and when they parted, each of
them was accompanied by one of these lights till he reached their
(respective) houses.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 455:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The Prophet delivered a sermon and said, "Allah gave a choice to one of
(His) slaves either to choose this world or what is with Him in the Hereafter.
He chose the latter." Abu Bakr wept. I said lo myself, "Why is this Sheikh
weeping, if Allah gave choice to one (of His) slaves either to choose this
world or what is with Him in the Here after and he chose the latter?" And
that slave was Allah's Apostle himself. Abu Bakr knew more than us. The
Prophet said, "O Abu Bakr! Don't weep. The Prophet added: Abu- Bakr has
favored me much with his property and company. If I were to take a Khalil
from mankind I would certainly have taken Abu Bakr but the Islamic
brotherhood and friendship is sufficient. Close all the gates in the mosque
except that of Abu Bakr.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 456:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
"Allah's Apostle in his fatal illness came out with a piece of cloth tied round
his head and sat on the pulpit. After thanking and praising Allah he said,
"There is no one who had done more favor to me with life and property than
Abu Bakr bin Abi Quhafa. If I were to take a Khalil, I would certainly have
taken Abu- Bakr but the Islamic brotherhood is superior. Close all the small
doors in this mosque except that of Abu Bakr."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 457:
Narrated Nafi:
Ibn 'Umar said, "The Prophet arrived at Mecca and sent for 'Uthman bin
Talha. He opened the gate of the Ka'ba and the Prophet, Bilal, Usama bin
Zaid and 'Uthman bin Talha entered the Ka'ba and then they closed its door
(from inside). They stayed there for an hour, and then came out." Ibn 'Umar
added, "I quickly went to Bilal and asked him (whether the Prophet had
prayed). Bilal replied, 'He prayed in it.' I asked, 'Where?' He replied,
'Between the two pillars.' "Ibn 'Umar added, "I forgot to ask how many
Rakat he (the Prophet) had prayed in the Ka'ba."
Volume 1, Book 8, Number 458:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle sent some horse men to Najd and they brought a man called
Thumama bin Uthal from Bani Hanifa. They fastened him to one of the pillars
of the mosque.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 459:
Narrated Al-Sa'ib bin Yazid:
I was standing in the mosque and somebody threw a gravel at me. I looked
and found that he was 'Umar bin Al-Khattab. He said to me, "Fetch those
two men to me." When I did, he said to them, "Who are you? (Or) where do
you come from?" They replied, "We are from Ta'if." 'Umar said, "Were you
from this city (Medina) I would have punished you for raising your voices in
the mosque of Allah's Apostle

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 460:
Narrated 'Kab bin Malik:
During the life-time of Allah's Apostle I asked Ibn Abi Hadrad in the mosque
to pay the debts which he owed to me and our voices grew so loud that
Allah's Apostle heard them while he was in his house. So he came to us after
raising the curtain of his room. The Prophet said, "O Ka'b bin Malik!" I
replied, "Labaik, O Allah's Apostle." He gestured with his hand to me to
reduce the debt to one half. I said, "O Allah's Apostle have done it." Allah's
Apostle said (to Ibn Hadrad), "Get up and pay it."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 461:
Narrated Nafi':
Ibn 'Umar said, "While the Prophet was on the pulpit, a man asked him how
to offer the night prayers. He replied, 'Pray two Rakat at a time and then
two and then two and so on, and if you are afraid of the dawn (the approach
of the time of the Fajr prayer) pray one Rak'a and that will be the witr for all
the Rakat which you have offered." Ibn 'Umar said, "The last Rakat of the
night prayer should be odd for the Prophet ordered it to be so.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 462:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
A man came to the Prophet while he was delivering the sermon and asked
him how to offer the night prayers. The Prophet replied, 'Pray two Rakat at
a time and then two and then two and so on and if you are afraid of dawn
(the approach of the time of the Fajr prayer) pray one Rak'a and that will be
the with for all the Rakat which you have prayed." Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin
'Abdullah bin 'Umar: A man called the Prophet while he was in the mosque.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 463:
Narrated Abu Waqid al-Laithi:
While Allah's Apostle was sitting in the mosque (with some people) three
men came, two of them came in front of Allah's Apostle and the third one
went away, and then one of them found a place in the circle and sat there
while the second man sat behind the gathering, and the third one went
away. When Allah's Apostle finished his preaching, he said, "Shall I tell you
about these three persons? One of them betook himself to Allah and so
Allah accepted him and accommodated him; the second felt shy before Allah
so Allah did the same for him and sheltered him in His Mercy (and did not
punish him), while the third turned his face from Allah, and went away, so
Allah turned His face from him likewise.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 464:
Narrated 'Abbad bin Tamim:
that his uncle said, "I saw Allah's Apostle lying flat (on his back) in the
mosque with one leg on the other." Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab that
'Umar and 'Uthman used to do the same.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 465:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) I had seen my parents following Islam since I
attained the age of puberty. Not a day passed but the Prophet visited us,
both in the mornings and evenings. My father Abii Bakr thought of building
a mosque in the courtyard of his house and he did so. He used to pray and
recite the Qur'an in it. The pagan women and their children used to stand by
him and look at him with surprise. Abu Bakr was a Softhearted person and
could not help weeping while reciting the Quran. The chiefs of the Quraish
pagans became afraid of that (i.e. that their children and women might be
affected by the recitation of Quran)."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 466:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The prayer offered in congregation is twenty five times
more superior (in reward) to the prayer offered alone in one's house or in a
business center, because if one performs ablution and does it perfectly, and
then proceeds to the mosque with the sole intention of praying, then for
each step which he takes towards the mosque, Allah upgrades him a degree
in reward and (forgives) crosses out one sin till he enters the mosque. When
he enters the mosque he is considered in prayer as long as he is waiting for
the prayer and the angels keep on asking for Allah's forgiveness for him and
they keep on saying: 'O Allah! Be Merciful to him, O Allah! Forgive him, as
long as he keeps on sitting at his praying place and does not pass wind. (See
Hadith No. 620).
Volume 1, Book 8, Number 467:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar or Ibn 'Amr:
The Prophet clasped his hands, by interlacing his fingers. Narrated 'Abdullah
that Allah's Apostle said, "O 'Abdullah bin 'Amr! What will be your condition
when you will be left with the sediments of (worst) people?" (They will be in
conflict with each other).

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 468:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "A faithful believer to a faithful believer is like the bricks of
a wall, enforcing each other." While (saying that) the Prophet clasped his
hands, by interlacing his fingers.

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 469:
Narrates Ibn Sirin:
Abu Huraira said, "Allah's Apostle led us in one of the two 'Isha' prayers
(Abu Huraira named that prayer but I forgot it)." Abu Huraira added, "He
prayed two Rakat and then finished the prayer with Tasllm. He stood up
near a piece of wood Lying across the mosque and leaned on it in such a way
as if he was angry. Then he put his right hand over the left and clasped his
hands by interlacing his fingers and then put his J right cheek on the back of
his left hand. The people who were in haste left the mosque through its
gates. They wondered whether the prayer was reduced. And amongst them
were Abu Bakr and 'Umar but they hesitated to ask the Prophet. A longhanded man called Dhul-Yadain asked the Prophet, 'O Allah's Apostle! Have
you; forgotten or has the prayer been reduced?' The Prophet replied, 'I have
neither forgotten nor has the prayer been reduced' The Prophet added, 'Is
what Dhul Yadain has said true?' They (the people) said, 'Yes, it is true.' The
Prophet stood up again and led the prayer, completing the remaining
prayer, forgotten by him, and performed Talsrm, and then said, 'Allahu
Akbar.' And then he did a prostration as he used to prostrate or longer than
that. He then raised his head saying, 'Allahu Akbar; he then again said,
'Allahu Akbar', and prostrated as he used to prostrate or longer than that.
Then he raised his head and said, 'Allahu Akbar.' " (The subnarrator added,
"I think that they asked (Ibn Sirin) whether the Prophet completed the
prayer with Taslim. He replied, "I heard that 'Imran bin Husain had said,
'Then he (the Prophet) did Taslim.")

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 470:
Narrated Fudail bin Sulaiman:
Musa bin 'Uqba said, "I saw Salim bin 'Abdullah looking for some places on
the way and prayed there. He narrated that his father used to pray there,
and had seen the Prophet praying at those very places."
Narrated Nafi' on the authority of Ibn 'Umar who said, "I used to pray at
those places." Musa the narrator added, "I asked Salim on which he said, 'I
agree with Nafi' concerning those places, except the mosque situated at the
place called Sharaf Ar-Rawha."

Volume 1, Book 8, Number 471:
Narrated Hadith is about the various places on the way from Medina to
Mecca where the Prophet prayed and their In locations impossible to
translate.
BOOK 9. VIRTUES OF THE PRAYER HALL (SUTRA OF THE MUSALLA) (472-499)
Volume 1, Book 9, Number 472:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Once I came riding a she-ass when I had just attained the age of puberty.
Allah's Apostle was offering the prayer at Mina with no wall in front of him
and I passed in front of some of the row. There I dismounted and let my sheass loose to graze and entered the row and nobody objected to me about it.

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 473:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Whenever Allah's Apostle came out on 'Id day, he used to order that a Harba
(a short spear) to be planted in front of him (as a Sutra for his prayer) and
then he used to pray facing it with the people behind him and used to do the
same while on a journey. After the Prophet , this practice was adopted by
the Muslim rulers (who followed his traditions).

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 474:
Narrated 'Aun bin Abi Juhaifa:
I heard my father saying, "The Prophet led us, and prayed a two-Rak'at Zuhr
prayer and then a two-Rak'at 'Asr prayer at Al-Batha' with an 'Anza
(planted) in front of him (as a Sutra) while women and donkeys were
passing in front of him (beyond that 'Anza)."

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 475:
Narrated Sahl (bin Sa'd):
The distance between the Musalla of Allah's Apostle and the wall was just
sufficient for a sheep to pass through .

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 476:
Narrated Salama:
The distance between the wall of the mosque and the pulpit was hardly
enough for a sheep to pass through.

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 477:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet used to get a Harba planted in front of him (as a Sutra) and
pray behind it.

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 478:
Narrated 'Aun bin Abi Juhaifa:
that he had heard his father saying, "Allah's Apostle came to us at mid-day
and water was brought for his ablution. He performed ablution and led us in
Zuhr and 'Asr prayers with an 'Anza planted in front of him (as a Sutra),
while women and donkeys were passing beyond it."

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 479:
Narrated Anas Ibn Malik:
Whenever the Prophet went for answering the call of nature, I and another
boy used to go after him with a staff, a stick or an 'Anza and a tumbler of
water and when he finished from answering the call of nature we would
hand that tumbler of water to him.
Volume 1, Book 9, Number 480:
Narrated Abu Juhaifa:
Allah's Apostle came out at midday and offered a two-Rak'at Zuhr and 'Asr
prayers at Al-Batha and an 'Anza was planted in front of him (as a Sutra). He
performed ablution and the people took the remaining water left after his
ablution and rubbed their bodies with it.

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 481:
Narrated Yazid bin Al 'Ubaid:
I used to accompany Salama bin Al-Akwa' and he used to pray behind the
pillar which was near the place where the Quran's were kept I said, "O Abu
Muslim! I see you always seeking to pray behind this pillar." He replied, "I
saw Allah's Apostle always seeking to pray near that pillar."

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 482:
Narrated Anas:
I saw the most famous people amongst the companions of the Prophet
hurrying towards the pillars at the Maghrib prayer before the Prophet came
for the prayer.

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 483:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet entered the Ka'ba along with Usama bin Zaid, 'Uthman bin
Talha and Bilal and remained there for a long time. When they came out, I
was the first man to enter the Ka'ba. I asked Bilal "Where did the Prophet
pray?" Bilal replied, "Between the two front Pillars."
Volume 1, Book 9, Number 484:
Narrated Nafi':
'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle entered the Ka'ba along with
Usama bin Zaid, Bilal and 'Uthman bin Talha Al-Hajabi and closed the door
and stayed there for some time. I asked Bilal when he came out, 'What did
the Prophet do?' He replied, 'He offered prayer with one pillar to his left and
one to his right and three behind.' In those days the Ka'ba was supported by
six pillars." Malik said: "There were two pillars on his (the Prophet's) right
side."

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 485:
Narrated Nafi:
"The Prophet used to make his she-camel sit across and he would pray
facing it (as a Sutra)." I asked, "What would the Prophet do if the she-camel
was provoked and moved?" He said, "He would take its camel-saddle and
put it in front of him and pray facing its back part (as a Sutra). And Ibn 'Umar
used to do the same." (This indicates that one should not pray except
behind a Sutra).

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 486:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Do you make us (women) equal to dogs and donkeys? While I used to lie in
my bed, the Prophet would come and pray facing the middle of the bed. I
used to consider it not good to stand in front of him in his prayers. So I used
to slip away slowly and quietly from the foot of the bed till I got out of my
guilt.

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 487:
Narrated Abu Sa'id:
The Prophet said, (what is ascribed to him in the following Hadith 488):

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 488:
Narrated Abu Salih As-Samman:
I saw Abu Said Al-Khudri praying on a Friday, behind something which acted
as a Sutra. A young man from Bani Abi Mu'ait, wanted to pass in front of
him, but Abu Said repulsed him with a push on his chest. Finding no
alternative he again tried to pass but Abu Said pushed him with a greater
force. The young man abused Abu Said and went to Marwan and lodged a
complaint against Abu Said and Abu Said followed the young man to
Marwan who asked him, "O Abu Said! What has happened between you and
the son of your brother?" Abu Sa'id said to him, "I heard the Prophet saying,
'If anybody amongst you is praying behind something as a Sutra and
somebody tries to pass in front of him, then he should repulse him and if he
refuses, he should use force against him for he is a satan.' "

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 489:
Narrated Busr bin Said:
that Zaid bin Khalid sent him to Abi Juhaim to ask him what he had heard
from Allah's Apostle about a person passing in front of another person who
was praying. Abu Juhaim replied, "Allah's Apostle said, 'If the person who
passes in front of another person in prayer knew the magnitude of his sin he
would prefer to wait for 40 (days, months or years) rather than to pass in
front of him." Abu An-Nadr said, "I do not remember exactly whether he
said 40 days, months or years."

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 490:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The things which annul the prayers were mentioned before me. They said,
"Prayer is annulled by a dog, a donkey and a woman (if they pass in front of
the praying people)." I said, "You have made us (i.e. women) dogs. I saw the
Prophet praying while I used to lie in my bed between him and the Qibla.
Whenever I was in need of something, I would slip away. for I disliked to
face him."

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 491:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to pray while I was sleeping across in his bed in front of
him. Whenever he wanted to pray Witr, he would wake me up and I would
pray Witr.

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 492:
Narrated 'Aisha:
the wife of the Prophet, "I used to sleep in front of Allah's Apostle with my
legs opposite his Qibla (facing him); and whenever he prostrated, he pushed
my feet and I withdrew them and whenever he stood, I stretched them."
'Aisha added, "In those days there were no lamps in the houses."

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 493:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The things which annual prayer were mentioned before me (and those
were): a dog, a donkey and a woman. I said, "You have compared us
(women) to donkeys and dogs. By Allah! I saw the Prophet praying while I
used to lie in (my) bed between him and the Qibla. Whenever I was in need
of something, I disliked to sit and trouble the Prophet. So, I would slip away
by the side of his feet."
Volume 1, Book 9, Number 494:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle used to get up at night and pray
while I used to lie across between him and the Qibla on his family's bed.

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 495:
Narrated Abu Qatada Al-Ansari:
Allah's Apostle was praying and he was carrying Umama the daughters of
Zainab, the daughter of Allah's Apostle and she was the daughter of 'As bin
Rabi'a bin 'AbduShams. When he prostrated, he put her down and when he
stood, he carried her (on his neck).

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 496:
Narrated Maimuna bint Al-Harith:
My bed was beside the praying place (Musalla) of the Prophet and
sometimes his garment fell on me while I used to lie in my bed.

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 497:
Narrated Maimuna:
The Prophet used to pray while I used to sleep beside him during my periods
(menses) and in prostrations his garment used to touch me.

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 498:
Narrated 'Aisha:
It is not good that you people have made us (women) equal to dogs and
donkeys. No doubt I saw Allah's Apostle praying while I used to lie between
him and the Qibla and when he wanted to prostrate, he pushed my legs and
I withdrew them.

Volume 1, Book 9, Number 499:
Narrated 'Amr bin Maimuin:
'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said, "While Allah's Apostle was praying beside the
Ka'ba, there were some Quraish people sitting in a gathering. One of them
said, 'Don't you see this (who does deeds just to show off)? Who amongst
you can go and bring the dung, blood and the abdominal contents
(intestines, etc). of the slaughtered camels of the family of so and so and
then wait till he prostrates and put that in between his shoulders?' The most
unfortunate amongst them ('Uqba bin Abi Mu'ait) went (and brought them)
and when Allah's Apostle prostrated, he put them between his shoulders.
The Prophet remained in prostration and they laughed so much so that they
fell on each other. A passerby went to Fatima, who was a young girl in those
days. She came running and the Prophet was still in prostration. She
removed them and cursed upon the Quraish on their faces. When Allah's
Apostle completed his prayer, he said, 'O Allah! Take revenge on Quraish.'
He said so thrice and added, 'O Allah! take revenge on 'Amr bin Hisham,
'Utba bin Rabia, Shaiba bin Rabi'a, Al-Walid bin'Utba, Umaiya bin Khalaf,
'Uqba bin Abi Mu'ait and 'Umar a bin Al-Walid." Abdullah added, "By Allah! I
saw all of them dead in the battle field on the day of Badr and they were
dragged and thrown in the Qalib (a well) at Badr: Allah's Apostle then said,
'Allah's curse has descended upon the people of the Qalib (well).
BOOK 10. TIMES OF THE PRAYERS (500-576)
Volume 1, Book 10, Number 500:
Narrated Ibn Shihab:
Once'Umar bin 'Abdul 'Aziz delayed the prayer and 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair
went to him and said, "Once in 'Iraq, Al-MughTra bin Shu'ba delayed his
prayers and Abi Mas'ud Al-Ansari went to him and said, 'O Mughira! What is
this? Don't you know that once Gabriel came and offered the prayer (Fajr
prayer) and Allah's Apostle prayed too, then he prayed again (Zuhr prayer)
and so did Allah's Apostle and again he prayed ('Asr prayers and Allah's
Apostle did the same; again he prayed (Maghrib-prayer) and so did Allah's
Apostle and again prayed ('Isha prayer) and so did Allah's Apostle and
(Gabriel) said, 'I was ordered to do so (to demonstrate the prayers
prescribed to you)?'" 'Umar (bin 'Abdul 'AzTz) said to 'Urwa, "Be sure of
what you Say. Did Gabriel lead Allah's Apostle at the stated times of the
prayers?" 'Urwa replied, "Bashir bin Abi Mas'ud narrated like this on the
authority of his father." Urwa added, "Aisha told me that Allah's Apostle
used to pray 'Asr prayer when the sun-shine was still inside her residence
(during the early time of 'Asr)."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 501:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
"Once a delegation of 'Abdul Qais came to Allah's Apostle and said, "We
belong to such and such branch of the tribe of Rab'a and we can only come
to you in the sacred months. Order us to do something good so that we may
(carry out) take it from you and also invite to it our people whom we have
left behind (at home)." The Prophet said, " I order you to do four things and
forbid you from four things. (The first four are as follows):
1. To believe in Allah. (And then he: explained it to them i.e.) to testify that
none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and (Muhammad) am Allah's
Apostle
2. To offer prayers perfectly (at the stated times):
3. To pay Zakat (obligatory charity)
4. To give me Khumus
(The other four things which are forbidden are as follows):
1. Dubba
2. Hantam
3. Muqaiyat
4. Naqir (all these are utensils used for the preparation of alcoholic drinks)."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 502:
Narrated Jarir bin 'Abdullah:
I gave the pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle for to offer prayers
perfectly, to pay Zakat regularly, and to give good advice to every Muslim.

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 503:
Narrated Shaqiq:
that he had heard Hudhaifa saying, "Once I was sitting with 'Umar and he
said, 'Who amongst you remembers the statement of Allah's Apostle about
the afflictions?' I said, 'I know it as the Prophet had said it.' 'Umar said, 'No
doubt you are bold.' I said, 'The afflictions caused for a man by his wife,
money, children and neighbor are expiated by his prayers, fasting, charity
and by enjoining (what is good) and forbidding (what is evil).' 'Umar said, 'I
did not mean that but I asked about that affliction which will spread like the
waves of the sea.' I (Hudhaifa) said, 'O leader of the faithful believers! You
need not be afraid of it as there is a closed door between you and it.' 'Umar
asked, Will the door be broken or opened?' I replied, 'It will be broken.'
'Umar said, 'Then it will never be closed again.' I was asked whether 'Umar
knew that door. I replied that he knew it as one knows that there will b
night before the tomorrow morning. I narrated a Hadith that was free from
any mis-statement" The subnarrator added that they deputed Masruq to ask
Hudhaifa (about the door). Hudhaifa said, "The door was 'Umar himself."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 504:
Narrated Ibn Mas'ud:
A man kissed a woman (unlawfully) and then went to the Prophet and
informed him. Allah revealed:
And offer prayers perfectly At the two ends of the day And in some hours of
the night (i.e. the five compulsory prayers). Verily! good deeds remove
(annul) the evil deeds (small sins) (11.114). The man asked Allah's Apostle, "Is
it for me?" He said, "It is for all my followers."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 505:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
I asked the Prophet "Which deed is the dearest to Allah?" He replied, "To
offer the prayers at their early stated fixed times." I asked, "What is the next
(in goodness)?" He replied, "To be good and dutiful to your parents" I again
asked, "What is the next (in goodness)?" He replied, 'To participate in Jihad
(religious fighting) in Allah's cause." 'Abdullah added, "I asked only that
much and if I had asked more, the Prophet would have told me more."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 506:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "If there was a river at the door of anyone of
you and he took a bath in it five times a day would you notice any dirt on
him?" They said, "Not a trace of dirt would be left." The Prophet added,
"That is the example of the five prayers with which Allah blots out (annuls)
evil deeds."
Volume 1, Book 10, Number 507:
Narrated Ghailan:
Anas said, "I do not find (now-a-days) things as they were (practiced) at the
time of the Prophet." Somebody said "The prayer (is as it was.)" Anas said,
"Have you not done in the prayer what you have done?
Narrated Az-Zuhri that he visited Anas bin Malik at Damascus and found him
weeping and asked him why he was weeping. He replied, "I do not know
anything which I used to know during the life-time of Allah's Apostle except
this prayer which is being lost (not offered as it should be)."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 508:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "Whenever anyone of you offers his prayer he is speaking
in private to his Lord. So he should not spit to his right but under his left
foot." Qatada said, "He should not spit in front of him but to his left or under
his feet." And Shu'ba said, "He should not spit in front of him, nor to his
right but to his left or under his foot." Anas said: The Prophet said, "He
should neither spit in the direction of his Qibla nor to his right but to his left
or under his foot."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 509:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "Do the prostration properly and do not put your forearms flat with elbows touching the ground like a dog. And if you want to
spit, do not spit in front, nor to the right for the person in prayer is speaking
in private to his Lord."
Volume 1, Book 10, Number 510:
Narrated Abu Huraira and 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "If it is very hot, then pray the Zuhr prayer when it
becomes (a bit) cooler, as the severity of the heat is from the raging of the
Hell-fire."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 511:
Narrated Abu Dhar:
The Muadhdhin (call-maker) of the Prophet pronounced the Adhan (call) for
the Zuhr prayer but the Prophet said, "Let it be cooler, let it be cooler." Or
said, 'Wait, wait, because the severity of heat is from the raging of the Hellfire. In severe hot weather, pray when it becomes (a bit) cooler and the
shadows of hillocks appear."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 512:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "In very hot weather delay the Zuhr prayer till it becomes
(a bit) cooler because the severity of heat is from the raging of Hell-fire. The
Hell-fire of Hell complained to its Lord saying: O Lord! My parts are eating
(destroying) one another. So Allah allowed it to take two breaths, one in the
winter and the other in the summer. The breath in the summer is at the time
when you feel the severest heat and the breath in the winter is at the time
when you feel the severest cold."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 513:
Narrated Abu Sa'id:
that Allah's Apostle said, "Pray Zuhr prayer when it becomes (a bit) cooler as
the severity of heat is from the raging of the Hell-fire."
Volume 1, Book 10, Number 514:
Narrated Abu Dhar Al-Ghifar:
We were with the Prophet on a journey and the Mu'adhdhin (call maker for
the prayer) wanted to pronounce the Adhan (call) for the Zuhr prayer. The
Prophet said, 'Let it become cooler." He again (after a while) wanted to
pronounce the Adhan but the Prophet said to him, "Let it become cooler till
we see the shadows of hillocks." The Prophet added, "The severity of heat is
from the raging of the Hell-fire, and in very hot weather pray (Zuhr) when it
becomes cooler."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 515:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle came out as the sun declined at mid-day and offered the
Zuhr prayer. He then stood on the pulpit and spoke about the Hour (Day of
Judgment) and said that in it there would be tremendous things. He then
said, "Whoever likes to ask me about anything he can do so and I shall reply
as long as I am at this place of mine. Most of the people wept and the
Prophet said repeatedly, "Ask me." Abdullah bin Hudhafa As-Sahmi stood up
and said, "Who is my father?" The Prophet said, "Your father is Hudhafa."
The Prophet repeatedly said, "Ask me." Then Umar knelt before him and
said, "We are pleased with Allah as our Lord, Islam as our religion, and
Muhammad as our Prophet." The Prophet then became quiet and said,
"Paradise and Hell-fire were displayed in front of me on this wall just now
and I have never seen a better thing (than the former) and a worse thing
(than the latter)."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 516:
Narrated Abu Al-Minhal:
Abu Barza said, "The Prophet used to offer the Fajr (prayer) when one could
recognize the person sitting by him (after the prayer) and he used to recite
between 60 to 100 Ayat (verses) of the Qur'an. He used to offer the Zuhr
prayer as soon as the sun declined (at noon) and the 'Asr at a time when a
man might go and return from the farthest place in Medina and find the sun
still hot. (The sub-narrator forgot what was said about the Maghrib). He did
not mind delaying the 'Isha prayer to one third of the night or the middle of
the night."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 517:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
When we offered the Zuhr prayers behind Allah's Apostle we used to
prostrate on our clothes to protect ourselves from the heat.

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 518:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
"The Prophet prayed eight Rakat for the Zuhr and 'Asr, and seven for the
Maghrib and 'Isha prayers in Medina." Aiyub said, "Perhaps those were rainy
nights." Anas said, "May be."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 519:
Narrated Aisha:
Allah's Apostle used to offer the 'Asr prayer when the sunshine had not
disappeared from my chamber.

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 520:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle used to offer the 'Asr prayers at a time when the sunshine
was still inside my chamber and no shadow had yet appeared in it.

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 521:
Narrated Aisha:
The Prophet used to pray the 'Asr prayers at a time when the sunshine was
still inside my chamber and no shadow had yet appeared in it.

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 522:
Narrated Saiyar bin Salama:
I along with my father went to Abu- Barza Al-Aslarrni and my father asked
him, "How Allah's Apostle used to offer the five compulsory congregational
prayers?" Abu- Barza said, "The Prophet used to pray the Zuhr prayer which
you (people) call the first one at mid-day when the sun had just declined The
Asr prayer at a time when after the prayer, a man could go to the house at
the farthest place in Medina (and arrive) while the sun was still hot. (I forgot
about the Maghrib prayer). The Prophet Loved to delay the 'Isha which you
call Al- Atama and he disliked sleeping before it and speaking after it. After
the Fajr prayer he used to leave when a man could recognize the one sitting
beside him and he used to recite between 60 to 100 Ayat (in the Fajr prayer)
.

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 523:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
We used to pray the Asr prayer and after that if someone happened to go to
the tribe of Bani Amr bin Auf, he would find them still praying the Asr
(prayer).
Volume 1, Book 10, Number 524:
Narrated Abu Bakr bin Uthman bin Sahl bin Hunaif:
that he heard Abu Umama saying: We prayed the Zuhr prayer with 'Umar bin
Abdul Aziz and then went to Anas bin Malik and found him offering the Asr
prayer. I asked him, "O uncle! Which prayer have you offered?" He said 'The
Asr and this is (the time of) the prayer of Allah s Apostle which we used to
pray with him."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 525:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle used to offer the 'Asr prayer at a time when the sun was still
hot and high and if a person went to Al-'Awali (a place) of Medina, he would
reach there when the sun was still high. Some of Al-'Awali of Medina were
about four miles or so from the town.

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 526:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
We used to pray the 'Asr and after that if one of US went to Quba'he would
arrive there while the sun was still high.

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 527:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever misses the 'Asr prayer (intentionally) then it
is as if he lost his family and property."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 528:
Narrated Abu Al-Mahh:
We were with Buraida in a battle on a cloudy day and he said, "Offer the 'Asr
prayer early as the Prophet said, "Whoever leaves the 'Asr prayer, all his
(good) deeds will be annulled."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 529:
Narrated Qais:
Jarir said, "We were with the Prophet and he looked at the moon--full-moon-and said, 'Certainly you will see your Lord as you see this moon and you will
have no trouble in seeing Him. So if you can avoid missing (through sleep or
business, etc.) a prayer before the sun-rise (Fajr) and a prayer before sunset
('Asr), you must do so.' He then recited Allah's Statement:
And celebrate the praises Of your Lord before The rising of the sun And
before (its) setting." (50.39) Isma'il said, "Offer those prayers and do not
miss them."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 530:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Angels come to you in succession by night and day and
all of them get together at the time of the Fajr and 'Asr prayers. Those who
have passed the night with you (or stayed with you) ascend (to the Heaven)
and Allah asks them, though He knows everything about you, well, "In what
state did you leave my slaves?" The angels reply: "When we left them they
were praying and when we reached them, they were praying."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 531:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If anyone of you can get one Rak'a of the 'Asr prayer
before sunset, he should complete his prayer. If any of you can get one
Rak'a of the Fajr prayer before sunrise, he should complete his prayer."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 532:
Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah:
My father said, "I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'The period of your stay as
compared to the previous nations is like the period equal to the time
between the 'Asr prayer and sunset. The people of the Torah were given the
Torah and they acted (upon it) till mid-day then they were exhausted and
were given one Qirat (of gold) each. And then the people of the Gospel
were given the Gospel and they acted (upon it) till the 'Asr prayer then they
were exhausted and were! given one Qirat each. And then we were given
the Qur'an and we acted (upon it) till sunset and we were given two Qirats
each. On that the people of both the scriptures said, 'O our Lord! You have
given them two Qirats and given us one Qirat, though we have worked more
than they.' Allah said, 'Have I usurped some of your right?' They said, 'No.'
Allah said: "That is my blessing I bestow upon whomsoever I wish."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 533:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "The example of Muslims, Jews and Christians is like the
example of a man who employed laborers to work for him from morning till
night. They worked till mid-day and they said, 'We are not in need of your
reward.' SO the man employed another batch and said to them, 'Complete
the rest of the day and yours will be the wages I had fixed (for the first
batch). They worked Up till the time of the 'Asr prayer and said, 'Whatever
we have done is for you.' He employed another batch. They worked for the
rest of the day till sunset, and they received the wages of the two former
batches."
Volume 1, Book 10, Number 534:
Narrated Rafi' bin Khadij:
We used to offer the Maghrib prayer with the Prophet and after finishing
the prayer one of us may go away and could still see as Par as the spots
where one's arrow might reach when shot by a bow.

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 535:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet used to pray the Zuhr at mid-day, and the 'Asr at a time when
the sun was still bright, the Maghrib after sunset (at its stated time) and the
Isha at a variable time. Whenever he saw the people assembled (for Isha'
prayer) he would pray earlier and if the people delayed, he would delay the
prayer. And they or the Prophet used to offer the Fajr Prayers when it still
dark.

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 536:
Narrated Salama:
We used to pray the Maghrib prayer with the Prophet when the sun
disappeared from the horizon.

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 537:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet prayed seven Rakat together and eight Rakat together.

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 538:
Narrated 'Abdullah Al-Muzani:
The Prophet said, "Do not be influenced by bedouins regarding the name of
your Maghrib prayer which is called 'Isha' by them."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 539:
Narrated Abdullah:
"One night Allah's Apostle led us in the 'Isha' prayer and that is the one
called Al-'Atma by the people. After the completion of the prayer, he faced
us and said, "Do you know the importance of this night? Nobody present on
the surface of the earth to-night will be living after one hundred years from
this night." (See Hadith No. 575).

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 540:
Narrated Muhammad bin 'Amr:
We asked Jabir bin 'Abdullah about the prayers of the Prophet . He said, "He
used to pray Zuhr prayer at mid-day, the 'Asr when the sun was still hot, and
the Maghrib after sunset (at its stated time). The 'Isha was offered early if
the people gathered, and used to be delayed if their number was less; and
the morning prayer was offered when it was still dark. "

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 541:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle once delayed the 'Isha' prayer and that was during the days
when Islam still had not spread. The Prophet did not come out till 'Umar
informed him that the women and children had slept. Then he came out and
said to the people of the mosque:"None amongst the dwellers of the earth
has been waiting for it ('Isha prayer) except you."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 542:
Narrated Abu Musa:
My companions, who came with me in the boat and I landed at a place
called Baqi Buthan. The Prophet was in Medina at that time. One of us used
to go to the Prophet by turns every night at the time of the Isha prayer.
Once I along with my companions went to the Prophet and he was busy in
some of his affairs, so the 'Isha' prayer was delayed to the middle of the
night He then came out and led the people (in prayer). After finishing from
the prayer, he addressed the people present there saying, "Be patient! Don't
go away. Have the glad tiding. It is from the blessing of Allah upon you that
none amongst mankind has prayed at this time save you." Or said, "None
except you has prayed at this time." Abu Muisa added, 'So we returned
happily after what we heard from Alllah's Apostle ."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 543:
Narrated Abu Barza:
Allah's Apostle disliked to sleep before the 'Isha' prayer and to talk after it.

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 544:
Narrated Ibn Shihab from 'Urwa:
'Aisha said, "Once Allah's Apostle delayed the 'Isha' prayer till 'Umar
reminded him by saying, "The prayer!" The women and children have slept.
Then the Prophet came out and said, 'None amongst the dwellers of the
earth has been waiting for it (the prayer) except you." Urwa said, "Nowhere
except in Medina the prayer used to be offered (in those days)." He further
said, "The Prophet used to offer the 'Isha' prayer in the period between the
disappearance of the twilight and the end of the first third of the night."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 545:
Narrated Ibn Juraij from Nafi:
'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "Once Allah's Apostle was busy (at the time of the
'Isha'), so the prayer was delayed so much so that we slept and woke up and
slept and woke up again. The Prophet came out and said, 'None amongst
the dwellers of the earth but you have been waiting for the prayer." Ibn
'Umar did not find any harm in praying it earlier or in delaying it unless he
was afraid that sleep might overwhelm him and he might miss the prayer,
and sometimes he used to sleep before the 'Isha' prayer. Ibn Juraij said, "I
said to 'Ata', 'I heard Ibn 'Abbas saying: Once Allah's Apostle delayed the
'Isha' prayer to such an extent that the people slept and got up and slept
again and got up again. Then 'Umar bin Al-Khattab I, stood up and reminded
the Prophet I of the prayer.' 'Ata' said, 'Ibn 'Abbas said: The Prophet came
out as if I was looking at him at this time, and water was trickling from his
head and he was putting his hand on his head and then said, 'Hadn't I
thought it hard for my followers, I would have ordered them to pray ('Isha'
prayer) at this time.' I asked 'Ata' for further information, how the Prophet
had kept his hand on his head as he was told by Ibn 'Abbas. 'Ata' separated
his fingers slightly and put their tips on the side of the head, brought the
fingers downwards approximating them till the thumb touched the lobe of
the ear at the side of the temple and the beard on the face. He neither
slowed nor hurried in this action but he acted like that. The Prophet said:
"Hadn't I thought it hard for my followers I would have ordered them to
pray at this time."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 546:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet delayed the'lsha' prayer till midnight and then he offered the
prayer and said, "The people prayed and slept but you have been in prayer
as long as you have been waiting for it (the prayer)." Anas added: As if I am
looking now at the glitter of the ring of the Prophet on that night.

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 547:
Narrated Jarir bin 'Abdullah:
We were with the Prophet on a full moon night. He looked at the moon and
said, "You will certainly see your Lord as you see this moon, and there will be
no trouble in seeing Him. So if you can avoid missing (through sleep,
business, etc.) a prayer before the rising of the sun (Fajr) and before its
setting ('Asr) you must do so. He (the Prophet ) then recited the following
verse:
And celebrate the praises Of Your Lord before The rising of the sun And
before (its) setting." (50.39)

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 548:
Narrated Abu Bakr bin Abi Musa:
My father said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'Whoever prays the two cool prayers
('Asr and Fajr) will go to Paradise.' "

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 549:
Narrated Anas:
Zaid bin Thabit said, "We took the "Suhur" (the meal taken before dawn
while fasting is observed) with the Prophet and then stood up for the
(morning) prayer." I asked him how long the interval between the two
(Suhur and prayer) was. He replied, 'The interval between the two was just
sufficient to recite fifty to Sixth 'Ayat."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 550:
Narrated Qatada:
Anas bin Malik said, "The Prophet and Zaid bin Thabit took the 'Suhur'
together and after finishing the meal, the Prophet stood up and prayed (Fajr
prayer)." I asked Anas, "How long was the interval between finishing their
'Suhur' and starting the prayer?" He replied, "The interval between the two
was just sufficient to recite fifty 'Ayat." (Verses of the Quran)."
Volume 1, Book 10, Number 551:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:
I used to take the "Suhur" meal with my family and hasten so as to catch the
Fajr (morning prayer) with Allah's Apostle

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 552:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The believing women covered with their veiling sheets used to attend the
Fajr prayer with Allah's Apostle, and after finishing the prayer they would
return to their home and nobody could recognize them because of
darkness.

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 553:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever could get one Rak'a (of the Fajr prayer)
before sunrise, he has got the (morning) prayer and whoever could get one
Rak'a of the'Asr prayer before sunset, he has got the ('Asr) prayer."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 554:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever could get one Rak'a of a prayer, (in its proper
time) he has got the prayer."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 555:
Narrated 'Umar:
"The Prophet forbade praying after the Fajr prayer till the sun rises and after
the 'Asr prayer till the sun sets."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 556:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Some people told me the same narration (as above).

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 557:
Narrated Hisham's father:
Ibn 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'Do not pray at the time of sunrise and
at the time of sunset.' " Ibn 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'If the edge of
the sun appears (above the horizon) delay the prayer till it becomes high,
and if the edge of the sun disappears, delay the prayer till it sets (disappears
completely).' "

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 558:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle forbade two kinds of sales, two kinds of dresses, and two
prayers. He forbade offering prayers after the Fajr prayer till the rising of the
sun and after the 'Asr prayer till its setting. He also forbade "IshtimalAssama" and "al-Ihtiba" in one garment in such a way that one's private
parts are exposed towards the sky. He also forbade the sales called
"Munabadha" and "Mulamasa." (See Hadith No. 354 and 355 Vol. 3).

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 559:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "None of you should try to pray at sunrise or sunset."
Volume 1, Book 10, Number 560:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "There is no prayer after the morning prayer
till the sun rises, and there is no prayer after the Asr prayer till the sun sets."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 561:
Narrated Muawiya:
You offer a prayer which I did not see being offered by Allah's Apostle when
we were in his company and he certainly had forbidden it (i.e. two Rakat
after the Asr prayer).

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 562:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle forbade the offering of two prayers:
1. after the morning prayer till the sunrises.
2. after the 'Asr prayer till the sun sets.

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 563:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
I pray as I saw my companions praying. I do not forbid praying at any time
during the day or night except at sunset and sunrise.

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 564:
Narrated 'Aisha:
By Allah, Who took away the Prophet. The Prophet never missed them (two
Rakat) after the 'Asr prayer till he met Allah and he did not meet Allah till it
became heavy for him to pray while standing so he used to offer most of the
prayers while sitting. (She meant the two Rakat after Asr) He used to pray
them in the house and never prayed them in the mosque lest it might be
hard for his followers and he loved what was easy for them .

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 565:
Narrated Hisham's father:
'Aisha (addressing me) said, "O son of my sister! The Prophet never missed
two prostrations (i.e. Rakat) after the 'Asr prayer in my house."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 566:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle never missed two Rakat before the Fajr prayer and after the
Asr prayer openly and secretly.

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 567:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Whenever the Prophet come to me after the 'Asr prayer, he always prayed
two Rakat.

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 568:
Narrated Ibn Abu Malih:
I was with Buraida on a cloudy day and he said, "Offer the 'Asr prayer earlier
as the Prophet said, 'Whoever leaves the 'Asr prayer will have all his (good)
deeds annulled." (See Hadith No. 527 and 528)
Volume 1, Book 10, Number 569:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:
My father said, "One night we were traveling with the Prophet and some
people said, 'We wish that Allah's Apostle would take a rest along with us
during the last hours of the night.' He said, 'I am afraid that you will sleep
and miss the (Fajr) prayer.' Bilal said, 'I will make you get up.' So all slept and
Bilal rested his back against his Rahila and he too was overwhelmed (by
sleep) and slept. The Prophet got up when the edge of the sun had risen and
said, 'O Bilal! What about your statement?' He replied, 'I have never slept
such a sleep.' The Prophet said, 'Allah captured your souls when He wished,
and released them when He wished. O Bilal! Get up and pronounce the
Adhan for the prayer.' The Prophet performed ablution and when the sun
came up and became bright, he stood up and prayed."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 570:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
On the day of Al-Khandaq (the battle of trench.) 'Umar bin Al-Khattab came
cursing the disbelievers of Quraish after the sun had set and said, "O Allah's
Apostle I could not offer the 'Asr prayer till the sun had set." The Prophet
said, "By Allah! I, too, have not prayed." So we turned towards Buthan, and
the Prophet performed ablution and we too performed ablution and offered
the 'Asr prayer after the sun had set, and then he offered the Maghrib
prayer.

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 571:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "If anyone forgets a prayer he should pray that prayer
when he remembers it. There is no expiation except to pray the same." Then
he recited: "Establish prayer for My (i.e. Allah's) remembrance." (20.14).
Volume 1, Book 10, Number 572:
Narrated Jabir:
Umar came cursing the disbelievers (of Quraish) on the day of Al-Khandaq
(the battle of Trench) and said, "I could not offer the 'Asr prayer till the sun
had set. Then we went to Buthan and he offered the ('Asr) prayer after
sunset and then he offered the Maghrib prayer.

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 573:
Narrated Abu-l-Minhal:
My father and I went to Abi Barza Al-Aslami and my father said to him, "Tell
us how Allah's Apostle used to offer the compulsory congregational
prayers." He said, "He used to pray the Zuhr prayer, which you call the first
prayer, as the sun declined at noon, the 'Asr at a time when one of US could
go to his family at the farthest place in Medina while the sun was still hot.
(The narrator forgot what Abu Barza had said about the Maghrib prayer),
and the Prophet preferred to pray the 'Isha' late and disliked to sleep before
it or talk after it. And he used to return after finishing the morning prayer at
such a time when it was possible for one to recognize the person sitting by
his side and he (the Prophet) used to recite 60 to 100 'Ayat' (verses) of the
Qur'an in it."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 574:
Narrated Qurra bin Khalid:
Once he waited for Al-Hasan and he did not show up till it was about the
usual time for him to start his speech; then he came and apologized saying,
"Our neighbors invited us." Then he added, "Narrated Anas, 'Once we
waited for the Prophet till it was midnight or about midnight. He came and
led the prayer, and after finishing it, he addressed us and said, 'All the
people prayed and then slept and you had been in prayer as long as you
were waiting for it." Al-Hasan said, "The people are regarded as performing
good deeds as long as they are waiting for doing good deeds." Al-Hasan's
statement is a portion of Anas's Hadith from the Prophet .

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 575:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
The Prophet prayed one of the'lsha' prayer in his last days and after finishing
it with Taslim, he stood up and said, "Do you realize (the importance of) this
night? Nobody present on the
surface of the earth to-night would be living after the completion of one
hundred years from this night."
The people made a mistake in grasping the meaning of this statement of
Allah's Apostle and they indulged in those things which are said about these
narrators (i.e. some said that the Day of Resurrection will be established
after 100 years etc.) But the Prophet said, "Nobody present on the surface
of earth tonight would be living after the completion of 100 years from this
night"; he meant "When that century (people of that century) would pass
away."

Volume 1, Book 10, Number 576:
Narrated Abu 'Uthman:
'Abdur Rahman bin Abi Bakr said, "The Suffa Companions were poor people
and the Prophet said, 'Whoever has food for two persons should take a third
one from them (Suffa companions). And whosoever has food for four
persons he should take one or two from them' Abu Bakr took three men and
the Prophet took ten of them."
'Abdur Rahman added, my father my mother and I were there (in the
house). (The sub-narrator is in doubt whether 'Abdur Rahman also said, 'My
wife and our servant who was common for both my house and Abu Bakr's
house). Abu Bakr took his supper with the Prophet and remained there till
the 'Isha' prayer was offered. Abu Bakr went back and stayed with the
Prophet till the Prophet took his meal and then Abu Bakr returned to his
house after a long portion of the night had passed. Abu Bakr's wife said,
'What detained you from your guests (or guest)?' He said, 'Have you not
served them yet?' She said, 'They refused to eat until you come. The food
was served for them but they refused." 'Abdur Rahman added, "I went away
and hid myself (being afraid of Abu Bakr) and in the meantime he (Abu Bakr)
called me, 'O Ghunthar (a harsh word)!' and also called me bad names and
abused me and then said (to his family), 'Eat. No welcome for you.' Then
(the supper was served). Abu Bakr took an oath that he would not eat that
food. The narrator added: By Allah, whenever any one of us (myself and the
guests of Suffa companions) took anything from the food, it increased from
underneath. We all ate to our fill and the food was more than it was before
its serving.
Abu Bakr looked at it (the food) and found it as it was before serving or
even more than that. He addressed his wife (saying) 'O the sister of Bani
Firas! What is this?' She said, 'O the pleasure of my eyes! The food is now
three times more than it was before.' Abu Bakr ate from it, and said, 'That
(oath) was from Satan' meaning his oath (not to eat). Then he again took a
morsel (mouthful) from it and then took the rest of it to the Prophet. So
that meal was with the Prophet. There was a treaty between us and some
people, and when the period of that treaty had elapsed the Prophet divided
us into twelve (groups) (the Prophet's companions) each being headed by a
man. Allah knows how many men were under the command of each
(leader). So all of them (12 groups of men) ate of that meal."
BOOK 11. CALL TO PRAYERS (ADHAAN) (577-698)
Volume 1, Book 11, Number 577:
Narrated Anas:
The people mentioned the fire and the bell (they suggested those as signals
to indicate the starting of prayers), and by that they mentioned the Jews
and the Christians. Then Bilal was ordered to pronounce Adhan for the
prayer by saying its wordings twice, and for the Iqama (the call for the actual
standing for the prayers in rows) by saying its wordings once. (Iqama is
pronounced when the people are ready for the prayer).

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 578:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
When the Muslims arrived at Medina, they used to assemble for the prayer,
and used to guess the time for it. During those days, the practice of Adhan
for the prayers had not been introduced yet. Once they discussed this
problem regarding the call for prayer. Some people suggested the use of a
bell like the Christians, others proposed a trumpet like the horn used by the
Jews, but 'Umar was the first to suggest that a man should call (the people)
for the prayer; so Allah's Apostle ordered Bilal to get up and pronounce the
Adhan for prayers.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 579:
Narrated Anas:
Bilal was ordered to repeat the wording of the Adhan for prayers twice, and
to pronounce the wording of the Iqamas once except "Qad-qamat-is-Salat".

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 580:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
When the number of Muslims increased they discussed the question as to
how to know the time for the prayer by some familiar means. Some
suggested that a fire be lit (at the time of the prayer) and others put
forward the proposal to ring the bell. Bilal was ordered to pronounce the
wording of Adhan twice and of the Iqama once only.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 581:
Narrated Abu Qilaba:
Anas said, "Bilal was ordered to pronounce the wording of Adhan twice and
of Iqama once only." The sub narrator Isma'li said, "I mentioned that to
Aiyub and he added (to that), "Except Iqama (i.e. Qad-Qamatis-Salat which
should be said twice)."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 582:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "When the Adhan is pronounced Satan takes to his
heels and passes wind with noise during his flight in order not to hear the
Adhan. When the Adhan is completed he comes back and again takes to his
heels when the Iqama is pronounced and after its completion he returns
again till he whispers into the heart of the person (to divert his attention
from his prayer) and makes him remember things which he does not recall
to his mind before the prayer and that causes him to forget how much he
has prayed."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 583:
Narrated 'Abdul Rahman:
Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri told my father, "I see you liking sheep and the
wilderness. So whenever you are with your sheep or in the wilderness and
you want to pronounce Adhan for the prayer raise your voice in doing so, for
whoever hears the Adhan, whether a human being, a jinn or any other
creature, will be a witness for you on the Day of Resurrection." Abu Said
added, "I heard it (this narration) from Allah's Apostle."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 584:
Narrated Humaid:
Anas bin Malik said, "Whenever the Prophet went out with us to fight (in
Allah's cause) against any nation, he never allowed us to attack till morning
and he would wait and see: if he heard Adhan he would postpone the attack
and if he did not hear Adhan he would attack them." Anas added, "We
reached Khaibar at night and in the morning when he did not hear the
Adhan for the prayer, he (the Prophet ) rode and I rode behind Abi Talha and
my foot was touching that of the Prophet.
The inhabitants of Khaibar came out with their baskets and spades and
when they saw the Prophet they shouted 'Muhammad! By Allah,
Muhammad and his army.' When Allah's Apostle saw them, he said, "AllahuAkbar! Allahu-Akbar! Khaibar is ruined. Whenever we approach a (hostile)
nation (to fight), then evil will be the morning of those who have been
warned."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 585:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whenever you hear the Adhan, say what the
Mu'adhdhin is saying.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 586:
Narrated 'Isa bin Talha:
that he had heard Muawiya repeating the words of Adhan up to "Wa ashhadu Anna Muhammadan Rasulul-lah (and I testify that Muhammad is
Allah's Apostle.)"

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 587:
Narrated Yahya as above (586) and added:
"Some of my companions told me that Hisham had said, "When the
Mu'adhdhin said, "Haiya alas-sala(t) (come for the prayer)." Muawiya said,
"La hawla wala quwata illa billah (There is neither might nor any power
except with Allah)" and added, "We heard your Prophet saying the same."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 588:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever after listening to the Adhan says, 'Allahumma
Rabba hadhihi-d-da' watit-tammati was-salatil qa'imati, ati Muhammadan alwasilata wal-fadilata, wab' athhu maqaman mahmudan-il-ladhi wa' adtahu
(O Allah! Lord of this perfect call (of not ascribing partners to You) and of
the regular prayer which is going to be established! Kindly give Muhammad
the right of intercession and superiority and send him (on the Day of
Judgment) to the best and the highest place in Paradise which You
promised him)', then intercession for me will be permitted for him on the
Day of Resurrection").

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 589:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If the people knew the reward for pronouncing the
Adhan and for standing in the first row (in congregational prayers) and
found no other way to get that except by drawing lots they would draw lots,
and if they knew the reward of the Zuhr prayer (in the early moments of its
stated time) they would race for it (go early) and if they knew the reward of
'Isha' and Fajr (morning) prayers in congregation, they would come to offer
them even if they had to crawl."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 590:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Al-Harith:
Once on a rainy muddy day, Ibn 'Abbas delivered a sermon in our presence
and when the Mu'adhdhin pronounced the Adhan and said, "Haiya ala-ssala(t) (come for the prayer)" Ibn 'Abbas ordered him to say 'Pray at your
homes.' The people began to look at each other (surprisingly). Ibn 'Abbas
said. "It was done by one who was much better than I (i.e. the Prophet or
his Mu'adhdhin), and it is a license.'

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 591:
Narrated Salim bin Abdullah:
My father said that Allah s Apostle said, "Bilal pronounces 'Adhan at night,
so keep on eating and drinking (Suhur) till Ibn Um Maktum pronounces
Adhan." Salim added, "He was a blind man who would not pronounce the
Adhan unless he was told that the day had dawned."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 592:
Narrated Hafsa:
When the Muadh-dhin pronounced the Adhan for Fajr prayer and the dawn
became evident the Prophet ordered a two Rakat light prayer (Sunna)
before the Iqama of the compulsory (congregational) prayer.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 593:
Narrated 'Aisha
The Prophet used to offer two light Rakat between the Adhan and the
Iqama of the Fajr prayer.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 594:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Bilal pronounces the Adhan at night, so keep on eating
and drinking (Suhur) till Ibn Um Maktum pronounces the Adhan."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 595:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud:
The Prophet said, "The Adhan pronounced by Bilal should not stop you from
taking Suhur, for he pronounces the Adhan at night, so that the one offering
the late night prayer (Tahajjud) from among you might hurry up and the
sleeping from among you might wake up. It does not mean that dawn or
morning has started." Then he (the Prophet) pointed with his fingers and
raised them up (towards the sky) and then lowered them (towards the
earth) like this (Ibn Mas'ud imitated the gesture of the Prophet). Az-Zuhri
gestured with his two index fingers which he put on each other and then
stretched them to the right and left. These gestures illustrate the way real
dawn appears. It spreads left and right horizontally. The dawn that appears
in the high sky and lowers down is not the real dawn) .

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 596:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "Bilal pronounces the Adhan at night, so eat and drink
(Suhur) till Ibn Um Maktum pronounces the Adhan."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 597:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mughaffal Al-Muzani:
Allah's Apostle said thrice, "There is a prayer between the two Adhans
(Adhan and Iqama)," and added, "For the one who wants to pray."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 598:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
"When the Mu'adhdhin pronounced the Adhan, some of the companions of
the Prophet would proceed to the pillars of the mosque (for the prayer) till
the Prophet arrived and in this way they used to pray two Rakat before the
Maghrib prayer. There used to be a little time between the Adhan and the
Iqama." Shu'ba said, "There used to be a very short interval between the
two (Adhan and Iqama)."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 599:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle used to pray two light Rakat before the morning
(compulsory) prayer after the day dawned and the Mu'adhdhin had finished
his Adhan. He then would lie on his right side till the Mu'adhdhin came to
pronounce the Iqama.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 600:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mughaffal:
The prophet said, "There is a prayer between the two Adhans (Adhan and
Iqama), there is a prayer between the two Adhans." And then while saying it
the third time he added, "For the one who wants to (pray)."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 601:
Narrated Malik bin Huwairth:
I came to the Prophet with some men from my tribe and stayed with him for
twenty nights. He was kind and merciful to us. When he realized our longing
for our families, he said to us, "Go back and stay with your families and teach
them the religion, and offer the prayer and one of you should pronounce the
Adhan for the prayer when its time is due and the oldest one amongst you
should lead the prayer."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 602:
Narrated Abu Dhar:
We were in the company of the Prophet on a journey and the Mu'adhdhin
wanted to pronounce the Adhan for the (Zuhr) prayer. The Prophet said to
him, "Let it become cooler." Then he again wanted to pronounce the Adhan
but the Prophet; said to him, "Let it become cooler." The Mu'adh-dhin again
wanted to pronounce the Adhan for the prayer but the Prophet said, "Let it
become cooler," till the shadows of the hillocks become equal to their sizes.
The Prophet added, "The severity of the heat is from the raging of Hell."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 603:
Narrated Malik bin Huwairth:
Two men came to the Prophet with the intention of a journey. The Prophet
said, "When (both of) you set out, pronounce Adhan and then Iqama and
the oldest of you should lead the prayer."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 604:
Narrated Malik:
We came to the Prophet and stayed with him for twenty days and nights.
We were all young and of about the same age. The Prophet was very kind
and merciful. When he realized our longing for our families, he asked about
our homes and the people there and we told him. Then he asked us to go
back to our families and stay with them and teach them (the religion) and to
order them to do good things. He also mentioned some other things which I
have (remembered or) forgotten. The Prophet then added, "Pray as you
have seen me praying and when it is the time for the prayer one of you
should pronounce the Adhan and the oldest of you should lead the prayer.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 605:
Narrated Nafi:
Once in a cold night, Ibn 'Umar pronounced the Adhan for the prayer at
,Dajnan (the name of a mountain) and then said, "Pray at your homes", and
informed us that Allah's Apostle used to tell the Mu'adhdin to pronounce
Adhan and say, "Pray at your homes" at the end of the Adhan on a rainy or a
very cold night during the journey."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 606:
Narrated 'Aun bin Abi Juhaifa:
My father said, "I saw Allah's Apostle at a place called Al-Abtah. Bilal came
and informed him about the prayer and then came out with an Anza and
planted it in front of Allah's Apostle at Al-Abtah and pronounced the
Iqama."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 607:
Narrated 'Aun bin Abi Juhaifa:
My father said, "I saw Bilal turning his face from side to side while
pronouncing the Adhan for the prayer."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 608:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:
My father said, "While we were praying with the Prophet he heard the noise
of some people. After the prayer he said, 'What is the matter?' They replied
'We were hurrying for the prayer.' He said, 'Do not make haste for the
prayer, and whenever you come for the prayer, you should come with
calmness, and pray whatever you get (with the people) and complete the
rest which you have missed."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 609:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "When you hear the Iqama, proceed to offer the prayer
with calmness and solemnity and do not make haste. And pray whatever
you are able to pray and complete whatever you have missed.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 610:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:
My father said. "Allah's Apostle said, 'If the Iqama is pronounced then do
not stand for the prayer till you see me (in front of you).' "

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 611:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi:
Qatada, My father said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'If the Iqama is pronounced,
then do not stand for the prayer till you see me (in front of you) and do it
calmly.' "

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 612:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle went out (of the mosque) when the Iqama had been
pronounced and the rows straightened. The Prophet stood at his Musalla
(praying place) and we waited for the Prophet to begin the prayer with
Takbir. He left and asked us to remain in our places. We kept on standing till
the Prophet returned and the water was trickling from his head for he had
taken a bath (of Janaba).

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 613:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Once iqama was pronounced and the people had straightened the rows,
Allah's Apostle went forward (to lead the prayer) but he was Junub, so he
said, "Remain in your places." And he went out, took a bath and returned
with water trickling from his head. Then he led the prayer.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 614:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
On the day of Al-Khandaq (the trench), 'Umar bin Al-Khattab went to the
Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! By Allah, I could not pray (the 'Asr) till
the sun had set." 'Umar told this to the Prophet at the time when a fasting
person had done Iftar (taken his meals). The Prophet then went to Buthan
and I was with him. He performed ablution and offered the 'Asr prayer after
the sun had set and then the Maghrib prayer.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 615:
Narrated Anas:
Once the Iqama was pronounced and the Prophet was talking to a man (in a
low voice) in a corner of the mosque and he did not lead the prayer till
(some of) the people had slept (dozed in a sitting posture) .
Volume 1, Book 11, Number 616:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Once Iqama was pronounced a man came to the Prophet and detained him
(from the prayer).

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 617:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "By Him in Whose Hand my soul is I was about to order
for collecting fire-wood (fuel) and then order Someone to pronounce the
Adhan for the prayer and then order someone to lead the prayer then I
would go from behind and burn the houses of men who did not present
themselves for the (compulsory congregational) prayer. By Him, in Whose
Hands my soul is, if anyone of them had known that he would get a bone
covered with good meat or two (small) pieces of meat present in between
two ribs, he would have turned up for the 'Isha' prayer.'

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 618:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "The prayer in congregation is twenty seven times
superior to the prayer offered by person alone."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 619:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said, "The prayer in congregation is twenty five times superior
to the prayer offered by person alone."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 620:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The reward of the prayer offered by a person in
congregation is twenty five times greater than that of the prayer offered in
one's house or in the market (alone). And this is because if he performs
ablution and does it perfectly and then proceeds to the mosque with the
sole intention of praying, then for every step he takes towards the mosque,
he is upgraded one degree in reward and his one sin is taken off (crossed
out) from his accounts (of deeds). When he offers his prayer, the angels
keep on asking Allah's Blessings and Allah's forgiveness for him as long as he
is (staying) at his Musalla. They say, 'O Allah! Bestow Your blessings upon
him, be Merciful and kind to him.' And one is regarded in prayer as long as
one is waiting for the prayer."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 621:
Narrated Abu Salama bin 'Abdur Rahman:
Abu Huraira said, "I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'The reward of a prayer in
congregation is twenty five times greater than that of a prayer offered by a
person alone. The angels of the night and the angels of the day gather at the
time of Fajr prayer.' " Abu Huraira then added, "Recite the Holy Book if you
wish, for "Indeed, the recitation of the Qur'an in the early dawn (Fajr prayer)
is ever witnessed." (17.18).
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: The reward of the congregational prayer is
twenty seven times greater (than that of the prayer offered by a person
alone).

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 622:
Narrated Salim:
I heard Um Ad-Darda' saying, "Abu Ad-Darda' entered the house in an angry
mood. I said to him. 'What makes you angry?' He replied, 'By Allah! I do not
find the followers of Muhammad doing those good things (which they used
to do before) except the offering of congregational prayer." (This happened
in the last days of Abu Ad-Darda' during the rule of 'Uthman) .

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 623:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "The people who get tremendous reward for the prayer
are those who are farthest away (from the mosque) and then those who are
next farthest and so on. Similarly one who waits to pray with the Imam has
greater reward than one who prays and goes to bed. "

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 624:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "While a man was going on a way, he saw a thorny
branch and removed it from the way and Allah became pleased by his action
and forgave him for that." Then the Prophet said, "Five are martyrs: One
who dies of plague, one who dies of an abdominal disease, one who dies of
drowning, one who is buried alive (and) dies and one who is killed in Allah's
cause." (The Prophet further said, "If the people knew the reward for
pronouncing the Adhan and for standing in the first row (in the
congregational prayer) and found no other way to get it except by drawing
lots they would do so, and if they knew the reward of offering the Zuhr
prayer early (in its stated time), they would race for it and they knew the
reward for 'Isha' and Fajr prayers in congregation, they would attend them
even if they were to crawl')

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 625:
Narrated Humaid:
Anas said, "The Prophet said, 'O Bani Salima! Don't you think that for every
step of yours (that you take towards the mosque) there is a reward (while
coming for prayer)?" Mujahid said: "Regarding Allah's Statement: "We
record that which they have sent before (them), and their traces" (36.12).
'Their traces' means 'their steps.' " And Anas said that the people of Bani
Salima wanted to shift to a place near the Prophet but Allah's Apostle
disliked the idea of leaving their houses uninhabited and said, "Don't you
think that you will get the reward for your footprints." Mujahid said, "Their
foot prints mean their foot steps and their going on foot."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 626:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "No prayer is harder for the hypocrites than the Fajr and
the 'Isha' prayers and if they knew the reward for these prayers at their
respective times, they would certainly present themselves (in the mosques)
even if they had to c awl." The Prophet added, "Certainly I decided to order
the Mu'adh-dhin (call-maker) to pronounce Iqama and order a man to lead
the prayer and then take a fire flame to burn all those who had not left their
houses so far for the prayer along with their houses."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 627:
Narrated Malik bin Huwairith:
Prophet said (to two persons), "Whenever the prayer time becomes due,
you should pronounce Adhan and then Iqama and the older of you should
lead the prayer."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 628:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The angels keep on asking for Allah's Blessing and
Forgiveness for anyone of you as long as he is at his Musalla (praying place)
and does not do Hadath (passes wind). The angels say, 'O Allah! Forgive him
and be Merciful to him.' Each one of you is in the prayer as long as he is
waiting for the prayer and nothing but the prayer detains him from going to
his family."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 629:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah will give shade, to seven, on the Day when there
will be no shade but His. (These seven persons are) a just ruler, a youth who
has been brought up in the worship of Allah (i.e. worships Allah sincerely
from childhood), a man whose heart is attached to the mosques (i.e. to pray
the compulsory prayers in the mosque in congregation), two persons who
love each other only for Allah's sake and they meet and part in Allah's cause
only, a man who refuses the call of a charming woman of noble birth for
illicit intercourse with her and says: I am afraid of Allah, a man who gives
charitable gifts so secretly that his left hand does not know what his right
hand has given (i.e. nobody knows how much he has given in charity), and a
person who remembers Allah in seclusion and his eyes are then flooded with
tears."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 630:
Narrated Humaid:
Anas was asked, "Did Allah's Apostle wear a ring?" He said, "Yes. Once he
delayed the 'Isha' prayer till mid-night and after the prayer, he faced us and
said, 'The people prayed and have slept and you remained in prayer as long
as you waited for it.' " Anas added, "As if I were just now observing the
glitter of his ring."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 631:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah will prepare for him who goes to the mosque
(every) morning and in the afternoon (for the congregational prayer) an
honorable place in Paradise with good hospitality for (what he has done)
every morning and afternoon goings.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 632:
Narrated Malik Ibn Buhaina:
Allah's Apostle passed by a man praying two Rakat after the Iqama (had
been pronounced). When Allah's Apostle completed the prayer, the people
gathered around him (the Prophet) or that man and Allah's Apostle said to
him (protesting), Are there four Rakat in Fajr prayer? Are there four Rakat in
Fajr prayer?"

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 633:
Narrated Al-Aswad:
"We were with 'Aisha discussing the regularity of offering the prayer and
dignifying it. She said, 'When Allah's Apostle fell sick with the fatal illness
and when the time of prayer became due and Adhan was pronounced, he
said, 'Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in prayer.' He was told that Abu Bakr
was a soft-hearted man and would not be able to lead the prayer in his
place. The Prophet gave the same order again but he was given the same
reply. He gave the order for the third time and said, 'You (women) are the
companions of Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead the prayer.' So Abu Bakr came
out to lead the prayer. In the meantime the condition of the Prophet
improved a bit and he came out with the help of two men one on each side.
As if I was observing his legs dragging on the ground owing to the disease.
Abu Bakr wanted to retreat but the Prophet beckoned him to remain at his
place and the Prophet was brought till he sat beside Abu Bakr." Al-A'mash
was asked, "Was the Prophet praying and Abu Bakr following him, and were
the people following Abu Bakr in that prayer?" Al-A'mash replied in the
affirmative with a nod of his head. Abu Muawiya said, "The Prophet was
sitting on the left side of Abu Bakr who was praying while standing."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 634:
Narrated 'Aisha:
"When the Prophet became seriously ill and his disease became aggravated
he asked for permission from his wives to be nursed in my house and he was
allowed. He came out with the help of two men and his legs were dragging
on the ground. He was between Al-Abbas and another man."
'Ubaid Ullah said, "I told Ibn 'Abbas what 'Aisha had narrated and he said,
'Do you know who was the (second) man whose name 'Aisha did not
mention'" I said, 'No.' Ibn 'Abbas said, 'He was 'Ali Ibn Abi Talib.' "

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 635:
Narrated Nafi':
Once on a very cold and stormy night, Ibn 'Umar pronounced the Adhan for
the prayer and then said, "Pray in your homes." He (Ibn 'Umar) added. "On
very cold and rainy nights Allah's Apostle used to order the Mu'adhdhin to
say, 'Pray in your homes.' "

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 636:
Narrated Mahmuid bin Rabi' Al-Ansari:
'Itban bin Malik used to lead his people (tribe) in prayer and was a blind
man, he said to Allah's Apostle , "O Allah's Apostle! At times it is dark and
flood water is flowing (in the valley) and I am blind man, so please pray at a
place in my house so that I can take it as a Musalla (praying place)." So
Allah's Apostle went to his house and said, "Where do you like me to pray?"
'Itban pointed to a place in his house and Allah's Apostle, offered the prayer
there.
Volume 1, Book 11, Number 637:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Al-Harith:
Ibn Abbas addressed us on a (rainy and) muddy day and when the Mu'adhdhin said, "Come for the prayer" Ibn 'Abbas ordered him to say, "Pray in
your homes." The people began to look at one another with surprise as if
they did not like it. Ibn 'Abbas said, "It seems that you thought ill of it but no
doubt it was done by one who was better than I (i.e. the Prophet). It (the
prayer) is a strict order and I disliked to bring you out."
Ibn 'Abbas narrated the same as above but he said, "I did not like you to
make you sinful (in refraining from coming to the mosque) and to come (to
the mosque) covered with mud up to the knees."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 638:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
A cloud came and it rained till the roof started leaking and in those days the
roof used to be of the branches of date-palms. Iqama was pronounced and I
saw Allah's Apostles prostrating in water and mud and even I saw the mark
of mud on his forehead.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 639:
Narrated Anas bin Sirin:
I heard Anas saying, "A man from Ansar said to the Prophet, 'I cannot pray
with you (in congregation).' He was a very fat man and he prepared a meal
for the Prophet and invited him to his house. He spread out a mat for the
Prophet, and washed one of its sides with water, and the Prophet prayed
two Rakat on it." A man from the family of Al-Jaruid asked, "Did the Prophet
used to pray the Duha (forenoon) prayer?" Anas said, "I did not see him
praying the Duha prayer except on that day."
Volume 1, Book 11, Number 640:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "If supper is served, and Iqama is pronounced one should
start with the supper."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 641:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "If the supper is served start having it before praying
the Maghrib prayer and do not be hasty in finishing it."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 642:
Narrated Nafi':
Ibn 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'If the supper is served for anyone of
you and the Iqama is pronounced, start with the supper and don't be in
haste (and carry on eating) till you finish it." If food was served for Ibn
'Umar and Iqama was pronounced, he never came to the prayer till he
finished it (i.e. food) in spite of the fact that he heard the recitation (of the
Qur'an) by the Imam (in the prayer). Narrated Ibn 'Umar: The Prophet said,
"If anyone of you is having his meals, he should not hurry up till he is;
satisfied even if the prayer has been started."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 643:
Narrated Ja'far bin 'Amr bin Umaiya:
My father said, "I saw Allah's Apostle eating a piece of meat from the
shoulder of a sheep and he was called for the prayer. He stood up, put down
the knife and prayed but did not perform ablutilon.''
Volume 1, Book 11, Number 644:
Narrated Al-Aswad:
That he asked 'Aisha "What did the Prophet use to do in his house?" She
replied, "He used to keep himself busy serving his family and when it was
the time for prayer he would go for it."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 645:
Narrated Aiyub:
Abu Qilaba said, "Malik bin Huwairith came to this Mosque of ours and said,
'I pray in front of you and my aim is not to lead the prayer but to show you
the way in which the Prophet used to pray.' " I asked Abu Qilaba,"How did
he use to pray?' " He replied, "(The Prophet used to pray) like this Sheikh of
ours and the Sheikh used to sit for a while after the prostration, before
getting up after the first Rak'a. "

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 646:
Narrated Abu Musa:
"The Prophet became sick and when his disease became aggravated, he
said, "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the prayer." 'Aisha said, "He is a soft-hearted
man and would not be able to lead the prayer in your place." The Prophet
said again, "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in prayer." She repeated the
same reply but he said, "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in prayer. You are
the companions of Joseph." So the messenger went to Abu Bakr (with that
order) and he led the people in prayer in the lifetime of the Prophet.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 647:
Narrated 'Aisha:
the mother of the believers: Allah's Apostle in his illness said, "Tell Abu Bakr
to lead the people in prayer." I said to him, "If Abu Bakr stands in your place,
the people would not hear him owing to his (excessive) weeping. So please
order 'Umar to lead the prayer." 'Aisha added I said to Hafsa, "Say to him: If
Abu Bakr should lead the people in the prayer in your place, the people
would not be able to hear him owing to his weeping; so please, order 'Umar
to lead the prayer." Hafsa did so but Allah's Apostle said, "Keep quiet! You
are verily the Companions of Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the
prayer. " Hafsa said to 'Aisha, "I never got anything good from you."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 648:
Narrated Az-Zuhn:
Anas bin Malik Al-Ansari, told me, "Abu Bakr used to lead the people in
prayer during the fatal illness of the Prophet till it was Monday. When the
people aligned (in rows) for the prayer the Prophet lifted the curtain of his
house and started looking at us and was standing at that time. His face was
(glittering) like a page of the Qur'an and he smiled cheerfully. We were
about to be put to trial for the pleasure of seeing the Prophet, Abu Bakr
retreated to join the row as he thought that the Prophet would lead the
prayer. The Prophet beckoned us to complete the prayer and he let the
curtain fall. On the same day he died."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 649:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet did not come out for three days. The people stood for the
prayer and Abu Bakr went ahead to lead the prayer. (In the meantime) the
Prophet caught hold of the curtain and lifted it. When the face of the
Prophet appeared we had never seen a scene more pleasing than the face
of the Prophet as it appeared then. The Prophet beckoned to Abu Bakr to
lead the people in the prayer and then let the curtain fall. We did not see
him (again) till he died.
Volume 1, Book 11, Number 650:
Narrated Hamza bin 'Abdullah:
My father said, "When Allah's Apostle became seriously ill, he was told
about the prayer. He said, 'Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer.'
'Aisha said, 'Abu Bakr is a soft-hearted man and he would be over-powered
by his weeping if he recited the Qur'an.' He said to them, 'Tell him (Abu
Bakr) to lead the prayer. The same reply was given to him. He said again,
'Tell him to lead the prayer. You (women) are the companions of Joseph."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 651:
Narrated 'Urwa's father:
'Aisha said, "Allah's Apostle ordered Abu Bakr to lead the people in the
prayer during his illness and so he led them in prayer." 'Urwa, a sub narrator,
added, "Allah's Apostle felt a bit relieved and came out and Abu Bakr was
leading the people. When Abu Bakr saw the Prophet he retreated but the
Prophet beckoned him to remain there. Allah's Apostle sat beside Abu Bakr.
Abu Bakr was following the prayer of Allah's Apostle and the people were
following the prayer of Abu Bakr."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 652:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd As-Sa'idi:
Allah's Apostle went to establish peace among Bani 'Amr bin 'Auf. In the
meantime the time of prayer was due and the Mu'adh-dhin went to Abu
Bakr and said, "Will you lead the prayer, so that I may pronounce the
Iqama?" Abu Bakr replied in the affirmative and led the prayer. Allah's
Apostle came while the people were still praying and he entered the rows of
the praying people till he stood in the (first row). The people clapped their
hands. Abu Bakr never glanced sideways in his prayer but when the people
continued clapping, Abu Bakr looked and saw Allah's Apostle. Allah's
Apostle beckoned him to stay at his place. Abu Bakr raised his hands and
thanked Allah for that order of Allah's Apostle and then he retreated till he
reached the first row. Allah's Apostle went forward and led the prayer.
When Allah's Apostle finished the prayer, he said, "O Abu Bakr! What
prevented you from staying when I ordered you to do so?"
Abu Bakr replied, "How can Ibn Abi Quhafa (Abu Bakr) dare to lead the
prayer in the presence of Allah's Apostle?" Then Allah's Apostle said, "Why
did you clap so much? If something happens to anyone during his prayer he
should say Subhan Allah. If he says so he will be attended to, for clapping is
for women."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 653:
Narrated Malik bin Huwairth:
We went to the Prophet and we were all young men and stayed with him for
about twenty nights. The Prophet was very merciful. He said, "When you
return home, impart religious teachings to your families and tell them to
offer perfectly such and such a prayer at such and such a time and such and
such a prayer at such and such a time. And al the time of the prayer one of
you should pronounce the Adhan and the oldest of you should lead the
prayer."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 654:
Narrated Itban bin Malik Al-Ansari:
The Prophet (came to my house and) asked permission for entering and I
allowed him. He asked, "Where do you like me to pray in your house?" I
pointed to a place which I liked. He stood up for prayer and we aligned
behind him and he finished the prayer with Taslim and we did the same.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 655:
Narrated 'Ubaid-Ullah Ibn 'Abdullah bin 'Utba:
I went to 'Aisha and asked her to describe to me the illness of Allah's
Apostle. 'Aisha said, "Yes. The Prophet became seriously ill and asked
whether the people had prayed. We replied, 'No. O Allah's Apostle! They are
waiting for you.' He added, 'Put water for me in a trough." 'Aisha added,
"We did so. He took a bath and tried to get up but fainted. When he
recovered, he again asked whether the people had prayed. We said, 'No,
they are waiting for you. O Allah's Apostle,' He again said, 'Put water in a
trough for me.' He sat down and took a bath and tried to get up but fainted
again. Then he recovered and said, 'Have the people prayed?' We replied,
'No, they are waiting for you. O Allah's Apostle.' He said, 'Put water for me
in the trough.' Then he sat down and washed himself and tried to get up but
he fainted. When he recovered, he asked, 'Have the people prayed?' We
said, 'No, they are waiting for you. O Allah's Apostle! The people were in the
mosque waiting for the Prophet for the 'Isha prayer. The Prophet sent for
Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer. The messenger went to Abu Bakr
and said, 'Allah's Apostle orders you to lead the people in the prayer.' Abu
Bakr was a soft-hearted man, so he asked 'Umar to lead the prayer but
'Umar replied, 'You are more rightful.' So Abu Bakr led the prayer in those
days. When the Prophet felt a bit better, he came out for the Zuhr prayer
with the help of two persons one of whom was Al-'Abbas. while Abu Bakr
was leading the people in the prayer. When Abu Bakr saw him he wanted to
retreat but the Prophet beckoned him not to do so and asked them to make
him sit beside Abu Bakr and they did so. Abu Bakr was following the Prophet
(in the prayer) and the people were following Abu Bakr. The Prophet
(prayed) sitting."
'Ubaid-Ullah added "I went to 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas and asked him, Shall I tell
you what Aisha has told me about the fatal illness of the Prophet?' Ibn
'Abbas said, 'Go ahead. I told him her narration and he did not deny anything
of it but asked whether 'Aisha told me the name of the second person (who
helped the Prophet ) along with Al-Abbas. I said. 'No.' He said, 'He was 'Ali
(Ibn Abi Talib).
Volume 1, Book 11, Number 656:
Narrated Aisha:
the mother of the believers: Allah's Apostle during his illness prayed at his
house while sitting whereas some people prayed behind him standing. The
Prophet beckoned them to sit down. On completion of the prayer, he said,
'The Imam is to be followed: bow when he bows, raise up your heads (stand
erect) when he raises his head and when he says, 'Sami a-l-lahu limanhamida ' (Allah heard those who sent praises to Him) say then 'Rabbana wa
laka-l-hamd' (O our Lord! All the praises are for You), and if he prays sitting
then pray sitting."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 657:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Once Allah's Apostle rode a horse and fell down and the right side (of his
body) was injured. He offered one of the prayers while sitting and we also
prayed behind him sitting. When he completed the prayer, he said, "The
Imam is to be followed. Pray standing if he prays standing and bow when he
bows; rise when he rises; and if he says, 'Sami a-l-lahu-liman hamida, say
then, 'Rabbana wa Lakal-hamd' and pray standing if he prays standing and
pray sitting (all of you) if he prays sitting."
Humaid said: The saying of the Prophet "Pray sitting, if he (Imam) prays
sitting" was said in his former illness (during his early life) but the Prophet
prayed sitting afterwards (in the last illness) and the people were praying
standing behind him and the Prophet did not order them to sit. We should
follow the latest actions of the Prophet.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 658:
Narrated Al-Bara:
(and he was not a liar) When Allah's Apostle said, "Sami a-l-lahu Liman
hamida " none of us bent his back (for prostrations) till the Prophet
prostrated and then we would prostrate after him.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 659:
Narrated Abu Ishaq:
as above.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 660:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Isn't he who raises his head before the Imam afraid that
Allah may transform his head into that of a donkey or his figure (face) into
that of a donkey?"

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 661:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
When the earliest emigrants came to Al-'Usba a place in Quba', before the
arrival of the Prophet- Salim, the slave of Abu Hudhaifa, who knew the
Qur'an more than the others used to lead them in prayer.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 662:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "Listen and obey (your chief) even if an Ethiopian whose
head is like a raisin were made your chief."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 663:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If the Imam leads the prayer correctly then he and you
will receive the rewards but if he makes a mistake (in the prayer) then you
will receive the reward for the prayer and the sin will be his."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 664:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said to Abu-Dhar, "Listen and obey (your chief) even if he is an
Ethiopian with a head like a raisin."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 665:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Once I passed the night in the house of my aunt Maimuna. Allah's Apostle
offered the 'Isha' prayer and then came to the house and offered four Rakat
an slept. Later on, he woke up and stood for the prayer and I stood on his
left side. He drew me to his right and prayed five Rakat and then two. He
then slept till I heard him snoring (or heard his breath sounds). Afterwards
he went out for the morning prayer.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 666:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
One night I slept at the house of (my aunt) Maimuna and the Prophet was
there on that night. He performed ablution and stood up for the prayer. I
joined him and stood on his left side but he drew me to his right and prayed
thirteen Rakat and then slept till I heard his breath sounds. And whenever
he slept, he used to breathe with audible sounds. The Mu'adhdhin came to
the Prophet and he went out and prayed the morning prayer) without
repeating the ablution.
Volume 1, Book 11, Number 667:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Once I passed the night in the house of my aunt Maimuna. The Prophet
stood for the night prayer and I joined him and stood on his left side but he
drew me to his right by holding me by the head.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 668:
Narrated Mu'adh bin Jabal:
I used to pray the 'Isha prayer with the Prophet and then go to lead my
people in the prayer.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 669:
Narrated 'Amr:
Jabir bin 'Abdullah said, "Mu'adh bin Jabal used to pray with the Prophet
and then go to lead his people in prayer Once he led the 'Isha' prayer and
recited Surat "Al-Baqra." Somebody left the prayer and Mu'adh criticized
him. The news reached the Prophet and he said to Mu'adh, 'You are putting
the people to trial,' and repeated it thrice (or said something similar) and
ordered him to recite two medium Suras of Mufassal." ('Amr said that he
had forgotten the names of those Suras).

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 670:
Narrated Abu Mas'ud:
A man came and said, "O Allah's Apostle! By Allah, I keep away from the
morning prayer only because So and so prolongs the prayer when he leads
us in it." The narrator said, "I never saw Allah's Apostle more furious in
giving advice than he was at that time. He then said, "Some of you mak
people dislike good deeds (the prayer). So whoever among you leads the
people in prayer should shorten it because among them are the weak, the
old and the needy."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 671:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If anyone of you leads the people in the prayer, he
should shorten it for amongst them are the weak, the sick and the old; and if
anyone among your prays alone then he may prolong (the prayer) as much
as he wishes. "

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 672:
Narrated Abu Mas'ud:
A man came and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I keep away from the morning
prayer because so-and-so (Imam) prolongs it too much." Allah's Apostle
became furious and I had never seen him more furious than he was on that
day. The Prophet said, "O people! Some of you make others dislike the
prayer, so whoever becomes an Imam he should shorten the prayer, as
behind him are the weak, the old and the needy.''

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 673:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah Al-Ansari:
Once a man was driving two Nadihas (camels used for agricultural purposes)
and night had fallen. He found Mu'adh praying so he made his camel kneel
and joined Mu'adh in the prayer. The latter recited Surat 'AlBaqara" or Surat
"An-Nisa", (so) the man left the prayer and went away. When he came to
know that Mu'adh had criticized him, he went to the Prophet, and
complained against Mu'adh. The Prophet said thrice, "O Mu'adh ! Are you
putting the people to trial?" It would have been better if you had recited
"Sabbih Isma Rabbika-l-a-la (87)", Wash-Shamsi wadu-haha (91)", or "Wallaili Idha yaghsha (92)", for the old, the weak and the needy pray behind
you." Jabir said that Mu'adh recited Sura Al-Baqara in the 'Isha' prayer.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 674:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet used to pray a short prayer (in congregation) but used to offer
it in a perfect manner.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 675:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abi Qatada:
My father said, "The Prophet said, 'When I stand for prayer, I intend to
prolong it but on hearing the cries of a child, I cut it short, as I dislike to
trouble the child's mother.' "

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 676:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
I never prayed behind any Imam a prayer lighter and more perfect than that
behind the Prophet and he used to cut short the prayer whenever he heard
the cries of a child lest he should put the child's mother to trial.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 677:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "When I start the prayer I intend to prolong it, but on
hearing the cries of a child, I cut short the prayer because I know that the
cries of the child will incite its mother's passions."
Volume 1, Book 11, Number 678:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet, said, "Whenever I start the prayer I intend to prolong it, but on
hearing the cries of a child, I cut short the prayer because I know that the
cries of the child will incite its mother's passions."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 679:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Mu'adh used to pray with the Prophet and then go and lead his people
(tribe) in the prayer.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 680:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When the Prophet, became ill in his fatal illness, Someone came to inform
him about the prayer, and the Prophet told him to tell Abu Bakr to lead the
people in the prayer. I said, "Abu Bakr is a soft-hearted man and if he stands
for the prayer in your place, he would weep and would not be able to recite
the Qur'an." The Prophet said, "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the prayer." I said the
same as before. He (repeated the same order and) on the third or the fourth
time he said, "You are the companions of Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead the
prayer." So Abu Bakr led the prayer and meanwhile the Prophet felt better
and came out with the help of two men; as if I see him just now dragging his
feet on the ground. When Abu Bakr saw him, he tried to retreat but the
Prophet beckoned him to carry on. Abu Bakr retreated a bit and the Prophet
sat on his (left) side. Abu Bakr was repeating the Takbir (Allahu Akbar) of
Allah's Apostle for the people to hear.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 681:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When Allah's Apostle became seriously ill, Bilal came to him for the prayer.
He said, "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer." I said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Abu Bakr is a soft-hearted man and if he stands in your place, he
would not be able to make the people hear him. Will you order 'Umar (to
lead the prayer)?" The Prophet said, "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the
prayer." Then I said to Hafsa, "Tell him, Abu i Bakr is a soft-hearted man and
if he stands in his place, he would not be able to make the people hear him.
Would you order 'Umar to lead the prayer?' " Hafsa did so. The Prophet said,
"Verily you are the companions of Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people
in the prayer." So Abu- Bakr stood for the prayer. In the meantime Allah's
Apostle felt better and came out with the help of two persons and both of
his legs were dragging on the ground till he entered the mosque. When Abu
Bakr heard him coming, he tried to retreat but Allah's Apostle beckoned him
to carry on. The Prophet sat on his left side. Abu Bakr was praying while
standing and Allah's Apostle was leading the prayer while sitting. Abu Bakr
was following the Prophet and the people were following Abu Bakr (in the
prayer).

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 682:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Once Allah's Apostle prayed two Rakat (instead of four) and finished his
prayer. Dhu-l-yadain asked him whether the prayer had been reduced or
whether he had forgotten. Allah's Apostle asked the people whether Dhu-lyadain was telling the truth. The people replied in the affirmative. Then
Allah's Apostle stood up, offered the remaining two Rakat and then finished
his prayer with Taslim and then said, "Allahu Akbar." He followed it with two
prostrations like ordinary prostrations or a bit longer.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 683:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet prayed two Rakat of Zuhr prayer (instead of four) and he was
told that he had prayed two Rakat only. Then he prayed two more Rakat
and finished them with the Taslim followed by two prostrations.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 684:
Narrated 'Aisha:
the mother of the faithful believers: Allah's Apostle in his last illness said,
"Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer." I said, "If Abu Bakr stood in
your place, he would not be able to make the people hear him owing to his
weeping. So please order 'Umar to lead the prayer." He said, "Tell Abu Bakr
to lead the people in the prayer." I said to Hafsa, "Say to him, 'Abu Bakr is a
softhearted man and if he stood in your place he would not be able to make
the people hear him owing to his weeping. So order 'Umar to lead the
people in the prayer.' " Hafsa did so but Allah's Apostle said, "Keep quiet.
Verily you are the companions of (Prophet) Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead the
people in the prayer." Hafsa said to me, "I never got any good from you."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 685:
Narrated An-Nu'man bin 'Bashir:
The Prophet said, "Straighten your rows or Allah will alter your faces."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 686:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "Straighten your rows, for I see you from behind my back.'

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 687:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Once the Iqama was pronounced and Allah's Apostle faced us and said,
"Straighten your rows and stand closer together, for I see you from behind
my back.'

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 688:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Martyrs are those who die because of drowning, plague,
an abdominal disease, or of being buried alive by a falling building." And
then he added, "If the people knew the Reward for the Zuhr prayer in its
early time, they would race for it. If they knew the reward for the 'Isha' and
the Fajr prayers in congregation, they would join them even if they had to
crawl. If they knew the reward for the first row, they would draw lots for it."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 689:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The Imam is (appointed) to be followed. So do not differ
from him, bow when he bows, and say, "Rabbana-lakal hamd" if he says
"Sami'a-l-lahu Liman hamida"; and if he prostrates, prostrate (after him),
and if he prays sitting, pray sitting all together, and straighten the rows for
the prayer, as the straightening of the rows is amongst those things which
make your prayer a correct and perfect one. (See Hadith No. 657).

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 690:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "Straighten your rows as the straightening of rows is
essential for a perfect and correct prayer. "

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 691:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
I arrived at Medina and was asked whether I found any change since the
days of Allah's Apostle. I said, "I have not found any change except that you
do not stand in alignment in your prayers."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 692:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "Straighten your rows for I see you from behind my back."
Anas added, "Everyone of us used to put his shoulder with the shoulder of
his companion and his foot with the foot of his companion."

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 693:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
I prayed with the Prophet one night and stood on his left side. Allah's
Apostle caught hold of my head from behind and drew me to his right and
then offered the prayer and slept. Later the Mu'adh-dhin came and the
Prophet stood up for prayer without performing ablution.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 694:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
One night an orphan and I offered the prayers behind the Prophet in my
house and my mother (Um Sulaim) was standing behind us (by herself
forming a row).

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 695:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
One night I stood to the left of the Prophet in the prayer but he caught hold
of me by the hand or by the shoulder (arm) till he made me stand on his
right and beckoned with his hand (for me) to go from behind (him). (AlKashmaihani-Fateh al-Bari).

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 696:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle used to pray in his room at night. As the wall of the room
was LOW, the people saw him and some of them stood up to follow him in
the prayer. In the morning they spread the news. The following night the
Prophet stood for the prayer and the people followed him. This went on for
two or three nights. Thereupon Allah's Apostle did not stand for the prayer
the following night, and did not come out. In the morning, the people asked
him about it. He replied, that he way afraid that the night prayer might
become compulsory.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 697:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet had a mat which he used to spread during the day and use as a
curtain at night. So a number of people gathered at night facing it and
prayed behind him.

Volume 1, Book 11, Number 698:
Narrated Zaid bin Thabit:
Allah's Apostle made a small room in the month of Ramadan (Sa'id said, "I
think that Zaid bin Thabit said that it was made of a mat") and he prayed
there for a few nights, and so some of his companions prayed behind him.
When he came to know about it, he kept on sitting. In the morning, he went
out to them and said, "I have seen and understood what you did. You should
pray in your houses, for the best prayer of a person is that which he prays in
his house except the compulsory prayers."
BOOK 12. CHARACTERISTICS OF PRAYER (699-832)
Volume 1, Book 12, Number 699:
Narrated Anas bin Malik Al-Ansari:
Allah's Apostle rode a horse and fell down and the right side of his body was
injured. On that day he prayed one of the prayers sitting and we also prayed
behind him sitting. When the Prophet finished the prayer with Taslim, he
said, "The Imam is to be followed and if he prays standing then pray
standing, and bow when he bows, and raise your heads when he raises his
head; prostrate when he prostrates; and if he says "Sami'a-l-lahu Liman
hamida", you should say, "Rabbana wa-laka-l hamd.:

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 700:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle fell from a horse and got injured so he led the prayer sitting
and we also prayed sitting. When he completed the prayer he said, "The
Imam is to be followed; if he says Takbir then say Takbir, bow if he bows;
raise your heads when he raises his head, when he says, 'Sami' a-l-lahu Liman
hamida say, 'Rabbana laka-l-hamd', and prostrate when he prostrates."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 701:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The Imam is to be followed. Say the Takbir when he says
it; bow if he bows; if he says 'Sami a-l-lahu Liman hamida', say, ' Rabbana walaka-l-hamd', prostrate if he prostrates and pray sitting altogether if he prays
sitting."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 702:
Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah:
My father said, "Allah's Apostle used to raise both his hands up to the level
of his shoulders when opening the prayer; and on saying the Takbir for
bowing. And on raising his head from bowing he used to do the same and
then say "Sami a-l-lahu Liman hamida, Rabbana walaka-l-hamd." And he did
not do that (i.e. raising his hands) in prostrations.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 703:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
I saw that whenever Allah's Apostle stood for the prayer, he used to raise
both his hands up to the shoulders, and used to do the same on saying the
Takbir for bowing and on raising his head from it and used to say, "Sami a-llahu Liman hamida". But he did not do that (i.e. raising his hands) in
prostrations.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 704:
Narrated Abu Qilaba:
I saw Malik bin Huwairith saying Takbir and raising both his hands (on
starting the prayers and raising his hands on bowing and also on raising his
head after bowing. Malik bin Huwairith said, "Allah's Apostle did the same."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 705:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
I saw Allah's Apostle opening the prayer with the Takbir and raising his
hands to the level of his shoulders at the time of saying the Takbir, and on
saying the Takbir for bowing he did the same; and when he said, "Sami a-llahu Liman hamida ", he did the same and then said, "Rabbana wa laka-lhamd." But he did not do the same on prostrating and on lifting the head
from it."
Volume 1, Book 12, Number 706:
Narrated Nafi':
Whenever Ibn 'Umar started the prayer with Takbir, he used to raise his
hands: whenever he bowed, he used to raise his hands (before bowing) and
also used to raise his hands on saying, "Sami a-l-lahu Liman hamida", and he
used to do the same on rising from the second Rak'a (for the 3rd Rak'a). Ibn
'Umar said: "The Prophet used to do the same."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 707:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:
The people were ordered to place the right hand on the left forearm in the
prayer. Abu Hazim said, "I knew that the order was from the Prophet ."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 708:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "You see me facing the Qibla; but, by Allah, nothing is
hidden from me regarding your bowing and submissiveness and I see you
from behind my back."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 709:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "Perform the bowing and the prostrations properly. By
Allah, I see you from behind me (or from behind my back) when you bow or
prostrate."
Volume 1, Book 12, Number 710:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet, Abu Bakr and 'Umar used to start the prayer with "Al-hamdu
lil-lahi Rabbil-'ala-min (All praises are for Allah the Lord of the Worlds)."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 711:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle used to keep silent between the Takbir and the recitation of
Qur'an and that interval of silence used to be a short one. I said to the
Prophet "May my parents be sacrificed for you! What do you say in the
pause between Takbir and recitation?" The Prophet said, "I say, 'Allahumma,
ba'id baini wa baina khatayaya kama ba'adta baina-l-mashriqi wa-l-maghrib.
Allahumma, naqqim min khatayaya kama yunaqqa-ththawbu-l-abyadu minaddanas. Allahumma, ighsil khatayaya bil-ma'i wa-th-thalji wal-barad (O Allah!
Set me apart from my sins (faults) as the East and West are set apart from
each other and clean me from sins as a white garment is cleaned of dirt
(after thorough washing). O Allah! Wash off my sins with water, snow and
hail.)"

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 712:
Narrated Asma' bint Abi Bakr:
The Prophet once offered the eclipse prayer. He stood for a long time and
then did a prolonged bowing. He stood up straight again and kept on
standing for a long time, then bowed a long bowing and then stood up
straight and then prostrated a prolonged prostration and then lifted his
head and prostrated a prolonged prostration. And then he stood up for a
long time and then did a prolonged bowing and then stood up straight again
and kept on standing for a long time. Then he bowed a long bowing and
then stood up straight and then prostrated a prolonged prostration and
then lifted his head and went for a prolonged prostration. On completion o
the prayer, he said, "Paradise became s near to me that if I had dared, I
would have plucked one of its bunches for you and Hell became so near to
me that said, 'O my Lord will I be among those people?' Then suddenly I saw
a woman and a cat was lacerating her with it claws. On inquiring, it was said
that the woman had imprisoned the cat till it died of starvation and she
neither fed it no freed it so that it could feed itself."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 713:
Narrated Abu Ma'mar:
We asked Khabbab whether Allah's Apostle used to recite (the Qur'an) in
the Zuhr and the 'Asr prayers. He replied in the affirmative. We said, "How
did you come to know about it?" He said, "By the movement of his beard."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 714:
Narrated Al-Bara:
(And Al-Bara was not a liar) Whenever we offered prayer with the Prophet
and he raised his head from the bowing, we used to remain standing till we
saw him prostrating .

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 715:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
Once solar eclipse occurred during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle. He offered
the eclipse prayer. His companions asked, "O Allah's Apostle! We saw you
trying to take something while standing at your place and then we saw you
retreating." The Prophet said, "I was shown Paradise and wanted to have a
bunch of fruit from it. Had I taken it, you would have eaten from it as long as
the world remains."
Volume 1, Book 12, Number 716:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet led us in prayer and then went up to the pulpit and beckoned
with both hands towards the Qibla of the mosque and then said, "When I
started leading you in prayer, I saw the display of Paradise and Hell on the
wall of the mosque (facing the Qibla). I never saw good and bad as I have
seen today." He repeated the last statement thrice.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 717:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "What is wrong with those people who look towards the
sky during the prayer?" His talk grew stern while delivering this speech and
he said, "They should stop (looking towards the sky during the prayer);
otherwise their eye-sight would be taken away."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 718:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I asked Allah's Apostle about looking hither and thither in prayer. He replied,
"It is a way of stealing by which Satan takes away (a portion) from the
prayer of a person."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 719:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Once the Prophet prayed on a Khamisa with marks on it and said, "The
marks on it diverted my attention, take this Khamisa to Abu Jahm and bring
an Inbijaniya (from him.)"
Volume 1, Book 12, Number 720:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet saw expectoration in the direction of the Qibla of the mosque
while he was leading the prayer, and scratched it off. After finishing the
prayer, he said, "Whenever any of you is in prayer he should know that Allah
is in front of him. So none should spit in front of him in the prayer."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 721:
Narrated Anas:
While the Muslims were offering the Fajr prayer, Al lah's Apostle suddenly
appeared before them by living the curtain of the dwelling place of 'Aisha,
looked towards the Muslims who were standing in rows. He smiled with
pleasure. Abu Bakr started retreating to join the row on the assumption that
the Prophet wanted to come out for the prayer. The Muslims intended to
leave the prayer (and were on the verge of being put to trial), but the
Prophet beckoned them to complete their prayer and then he let the curtain
fall. He died in the last hours of that day.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 722:
Narrated Jabir bin Samura:
The People of Kufa complained against Sa'd to 'Umar and the latter
dismissed him and appointed 'Ammar as their chief . They lodged many
complaints against Sa'd and even they alleged that he did not pray properly.
'Umar sent for him and said, "O Aba Ishaq! These people claim that you do
not pray properly." Abu Ishaq said, "By Allah, I used to pray with them a
prayer similar to that of Allah's Apostle and I never reduced anything of it. I
used to prolong the first two Rakat of 'Isha prayer and shorten the last two
Rakat." 'Umar said, "O Aba Ishaq, this was what I thought about you." And
then he sent one or more persons with him to Kufa so as to ask the people
about him. So they went there and did not leave any mosque without asking
about him. All the people praised him till they came to the mosque of the
tribe of Bani 'Abs; one of the men called Usama bin Qatada with a surname
of Aba Sa'da stood up and said, "As you have put us under an oath; I am
bound to tell you that Sa'd never went himself with the army and never
distributed (the war booty) equally and never did justice in legal verdicts."
(On hearing it) Sa'd said, "I pray to Allah for three things: O Allah! If this
slave of yours is a liar and got up for showing off, give him a long life,
increase his poverty and put him to trials." (And so it happened). Later on
when that person was asked how he was, he used to reply that he was an
old man in trial as the result of Sa'd's curse. 'Abdul Malik, the sub narrator,
said that he had seen him afterwards and his eyebrows were over-hanging
his eyes owing to old age and he used to tease and assault the small girls in
the way.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 723:
Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever does not recite Al-Fatiha in his prayer, his
prayer is invalid."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 724:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle entered the mosque and a person followed him. The man
prayed and went to the Prophet and greeted him. The Prophet returned the
greeting and said to him, "Go back and pray, for you have not prayed." The
man went back prayed in the same way as before, returned and greeted the
Prophet who said, "Go back and pray, for you have not prayed." This
happened thrice. The man said, "By Him Who sent you with the Truth, I
cannot offer the prayer in a better way than this. Please, teach me how to
pray." The Prophet said, "When you stand for Prayer say Takbir and then
recite from the Holy Qur'an (of what you know by heart) and then bow till
you feel at ease. Then raise your head and stand up straight, then prostrate
till you feel at ease during your prostration, then sit with calmness till you
feel at ease (do not hurry) and do the same in all your prayers

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 725:
Narrated Jabir bin Samura:
Sa'd said, "I used to pray with them a prayer similar to that of Allah's Apostle
(the prayer of Zuhr and 'Asr) reducing nothing from them. I used to prolong
the first two Rakat and shorten the last two Rak'at." 'Umar said to Sa'd
"This was what we thought about you."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 726:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:
My father said, "The Prophet in Zuhr prayers used to recite Al-Fatiha along
with two other Suras in the first two Rakat: a long one in the first Rak'a and
a shorter (Sura) in the second, and at times the verses were audible. In the
'Asr prayer the Prophet used to recite Al-Fatiha and two more Suras in the
first two Rakat and used to prolong the first Rak'a. And he used to prolong
the first Rak'a of the Fajr prayer and shorten the second.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 727:
Narrated Abu Ma'mar:
I asked Khabbab whether the Prophet used to recite the Qur'an in the Zuhr
and the 'Asr prayers. He replied in the affirmative. We said, "How did you
come to know that?" He said, "From the movement of his beard."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 728:
Narrated Abu Ma'mar:
I asked Khabbab bin Al-Art whether the Prophet used to recite the Qur'an in
the Zuhr and the 'Asr prayers. He replied in the affirmative. I said, "How did
you come to know that?" He replied, "From the movement of his beard."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 729:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:
My father said, "The Prophet used to recite Al-Fatiha along with another
Sura in the first two Rakat of the Zuhr and the 'Asr prayers and at times a t
verse or so was audible to us."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 730:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
(My mother) Umu-l-Fadl heard me reciting "Wal Mursalati 'Urfan" (77) and
said, "O my son! By Allah, your recitation made me remember that it was the
last Sura I heard from Allah's Apostle. He recited it in the Maghrib prayer. "

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 731:
Narrated Marwan bin Al-Hakam:
Zaid bin Thabit said to me, "Why do you recite very short S&ras in the
Maghrib prayer while I heard the Prophet reciting the longer of the two long
Suras?"

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 732:
Narrated Jubair bin Mut'im:
My father said, "I heard Allah's Apostle reciting "At-Tur" (52) in the Maghrib
prayer."
Volume 1, Book 12, Number 733:
Narrated Abu Rafi:
I offered the 'Isha' prayer behind Abu Huraira and he recited, "Idha-sSama'u-n-Shaqqat" (84) and prostrated. On my inquiring, he said, "I
prostrated behind Abu-l-Qasim (the Prophet) (when he recited that Sura)
and I will go on doing it till I meet him."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 734:
Narrated Al-Bara:
The Prophet was on a journey and recited in one of the first two Rakat of
the 'Isha' prayer "Wat-tini waz-zaituni." (95)

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 735:
Narrated Abu Rafi':
Once I prayed the 'Isha' prayer with Abu Huraira and he recited, "Idha-sSama' u-nShaqqat" (84) and prostrated. I said, "What is that?" He said, "I
prostrated behind Abu-l-Qasim, (the Prophet) (when he recited that Sura)
and I will go on doing it till I meet him."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 736:
Narrated Al-Bara:
I heard the Prophet reciting wat-tini wazzaituni" (95) in the 'Isha' prayer,
and I never heard a sweeter voice or a better way of recitation than that of
the Prophet.
Volume 1, Book 12, Number 737:
Narrated Jabir bin Samura:
'Umar said to Sa'd, "The people complained against you in everything, even
in prayer." Sa'd replied, "Really I used to prolong the first two Rakat and
shorten the last two and I will never shorten the prayer in which I follow
Allah's Apostle." 'Umar said, "You are telling the truth and that is what I
think a tout you."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 738:
Narrated Saiyar bin Salama:
My father and I went to Abu Barza-al-Aslami to ask him about the stated
times for the prayers. He replied, "The Prophet used to offer the Zuhr prayer
when the sun just declined from its highest position at noon; the 'Asr at a
time when if a man went to the farthest place in Medina (after praying) he
would find the sun still hot (bright). (The sub narrator said: I have forgotten
what Abu Barza said about the Maghrib prayer). The Prophet never found
any harm in delaying the 'Isha' prayer to the first third of the night and he
never liked to sleep before it and to talk after it. He used to offer the
morning prayer at a time when after finishing it one could recognize the
person sitting beside him and used to recite between 60 to 100 verses in one
or both the Rakat."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 739:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Qur'an is recited in every prayer and in those prayers in which Allah's
Apostle recited aloud for us, we recite aloud in the same prayers for you;
and the prayers in which the Prophet recited quietly, we recite quietly. If you
recite "Al-Fatiha" only it is sufficient but if you recite something else in
addition, it is better.
Volume 1, Book 12, Number 740:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet set out with the intention of going to Suq 'Ukaz (market of
'Ukaz) along with some of his companions. At the same time, a barrier was
put between the devils and the news of heaven. Fire commenced to be
thrown at them. The Devils went to their people, who asked them, "What is
wrong with you?" They said, "A barrier has been placed between us and the
news of heaven. And fire has been thrown at us." They said, "The thing
which has put a barrier between you and the news of heaven must be
something which has happened recently. Go eastward and westward and
see what has put a barrier between you and the news of heaven." Those
who went towards Tuhama came across the Prophet at a place called
Nakhla and it was on the way to Suq 'Ukaz and the Prophet was offering the
Fajr prayer with his companions. When they heard the Qur'an they listened
to it and said, "By Allah, this is the thing which has put a barrier between us
and the news of heaven." They went to their people and said, "O our
people; verily we have heard a wonderful recital (Qur'an) which shows the
true path; we believed in it and would not ascribe partners to our Lord."
Allah revealed the following verses to his Prophet (Sura 'Jinn') (72): "Say: It
has been revealed to me." And what was revealed to him was the
conversation of the Jinns.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 741:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet recited aloud in the prayers in which he was ordered to do so
and quietly in the prayers in which he was ordered to do so. "And your Lord
is not forgetful." "Verily there was a good example for you in the ways of
the Prophet."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 742:
Narrated Abu Wa'il:
A man came to Ibn Mas'ud and said, "I recited the Mufassal (Suras) at night
in one Rak'a." Ibn Mas'ud said, "This recitation is (too quick) like the
recitation of poetry. I know the identical Suras which the Prophet used to
recite in pairs." Ibn Mas'ud then mentioned 20 Mufassal Suras including two
Suras from the family of (i.e. those verses which begin with) AL, HA, MIM
(which the Prophet used to recite) in each Rak'a.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 743:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:
My father said, "The Prophet uses to recite Al-Fatiha followed by another
Sura in the first two Rakat of the prayer and used to recite only Al-Fatiha in
the last two Rakat of the Zuhr prayer. Sometimes a verse or so was audible
and he used to prolong the first Rak'a more than the second and used to do
the same in the 'Asr and Fajr prayers."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 744:
Narrated Abu Ma'mar:
We said to Khabbab "Did Allah's Apostle used to recite in Zuhr and 'Asr
prayers?" He replied in the affirmative. We said, "How did you come to know
about it?" He said, "By the movement of his beard."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 745:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:
My father said, "The Prophet used to recite Al-Fatiha along with another
Sura in the first two Rakat of the Zuhr and 'Asr prayers. A verse or so was
audible at times and he used to prolong the first Rak'a."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 746:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:
My father said, "The Prophet used to prolong the first Rak'a of the Zuhr
prayer and shorten the second one and used to do the same in the Fajr
prayer."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 747:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Say Amin" when the Imam says it and if the Amin of any
one of you coincides with that of the angels then all his past sins will be
forgiven." Ibn Shihab said, "Allah's Apostle used to Say "Amin."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 748:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If any one of you says, "Amin" and the angels in the
heavens say "Amin" and the former coincides with the latter, all his past sins
will be forgiven."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 749:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Say Amen' when the Imam says "Ghair-il-maghdubi
'alaihim wala-ddal-lin; not the path of those who earn Your Anger (such as
Jews) nor of those who go astray (such as Christians); all the past sins of the
person whose saying (of Amin) coincides with that of the angels, will be
forgiven.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 750:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
I reached the Prophet in the mosque while he was bowing in prayer and I
too bowed before joining the row mentioned it to the Prophet and he said
to me, "May Allah increase your love for the good. But do not repeat it again
(bowing in that way)."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 751:
Narrated Imran bin Husain:
I offered the prayer with 'Ali in Basra and he made us remember the prayer
which we used to pray with Allah's Apostle. 'Ali said Takbir on each rising
and bowing.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 752:
Narrated Abu Salama:
When Abu Huraira led us in prayer he used to say Takbir on each bowing and
rising. On the completion of the prayer he used to say, "My prayer is more
similar to the prayer of Allah's Apostle than that of anyone of you."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 753:
Narrated Mutarrif bin 'Abdullah:
'Imran bin Husain and I offered the prayer behind Ali bin Abi Talib. When 'Ali
prostrated, he said the Takbir, when he raised his head, he said the Takbir
and when he got up for the third Rak'a he said the Takbir. On completion of
the prayer Imran took my hand and said, "This (i.e. 'Ali) made me remember
the prayer of Muhammad" Or he said, "He led us in a prayer like that of
Muhammad."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 754:
Narrated 'Ikrima
I saw a person praying at Muqam-lbrahim (the place of Abraham by the
Ka'ba) and he was saying Takbir on every bowing, rising, standing and
sitting. I asked Ibn 'Abbas (about this prayer). He admonished me saying:
"Isn't that the prayer of the Prophet?"

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 755:
Narrated 'Ikrima:
I prayed behind a Sheikh at Mecca and he said twenty two Takbirs (during
the prayer). I told Ibn 'Abbas that he (i.e. that Sheikh) was foolish. Ibn
'Abbas admonished me and said, "This is the tradition of Abu-l-Qasim." And
narrated Abu Huraira: Whenever Allah's Apostle stood for the prayer, he
said Takbir on starting the prayer and then on bowing. On rising from
bowing he said, "Sami' a-l-lahu liman hamida," and then while standing
straight he used to say, "Rabbana laka-l hamd" (Al-Laith said, "(The Prophet
said), 'Walaka-l-hamd'." He used to say Takbir on prostrating and on raising
his head from prostration; again he would Say Takbir on prostrating and
raising his head. He would then do the same in the whole of the prayer till it
was completed. On rising from the second Rak'a (after sitting for AtTahiyyat), he used to say Takbir.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 756:
Narrated Mus'ab bin Sa'd:
I offered prayer beside my father and approximated both my hands and
placed them in between the knees. My father told me not to do so and said,
"We used to do the same but we were forbidden (by the Prophet) to do it
and were ordered to place the hands on the knees."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 757:
Narrated Zaid binWahb:
Hudhaifa saw a person who was not performing the bowing and
prostrations perfectly. He said to him, "You have not prayed and if you
should die you would die on a religion other than that of Muhammad."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 758:
Narrated Al-Bara:
The bowing, the prostration the sitting in between the two prostrations and
the standing after the bowing of the Prophet but not Qiyam (standing in the
prayer) and Qu'ud (sitting in the prayer) used to be approximately equal (in
duration).

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 759:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Once the Prophet entered the mosque, a man came in, offered the prayer
and greeted the Prophet. The Prophet returned his greeting and said to him,
"Go back and pray again for you have not prayed." The man offered the
prayer again, came back and greeted the Prophet. He said to him thrice, "Go
back and pray again for you have not prayed." The man said, "By Him Who
has sent you with the truth! I do not know a better way of praying. Kindly
teach Me how to pray." He said, "When you stand for the prayer, say Takbir
and then recite from the Qur'an what you know and then bow with
calmness till you feel at ease, then rise from bowing till you stand straight.
Afterwards prostrate calmly till you feel at ease and then raise (your head)
and sit with Calmness till you feel at ease and then prostrate with calmness
till you feel at ease in prostration and do the same in the whole of your
prayer."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 760:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to say in his bowing and prostrations, "SubhanakaAllahumma Rabbana wa-bihamdika Allahumma-ighfirli.' (I honor Allah from
all what (unsuitable things) is ascribed to Him. O Allah Our Lord! And all the
praises are for You. O Allah! Forgive me)."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 761:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
When the Prophet said, "Sami' a-l-lahu Liman hamida," (Allah heard those
who sent praises to Him), he would say, "Rabbana wa-laka-l-hamd." On
bowing and raising his head from it the Prophet used to say Takbir. He also
used to say Takbir on rising after the two prostrations. (See Hadith No. 656).

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 762:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "When the Imam says, "Sami' a-l-lahu Liman hamida,"
you should say, "Allahumma Rabbana laka-l-hamd." And if the saying of any
one of you coincides with that of the angels, all his past sins will be
forgiven."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 763:
Narrated Anas:
The Qunut used to be recited in the Maghrib and the Fajr prayers.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 764:
Narrated Rifa'a bin Rafi AzZuraqi:
One day we were praying behind the Prophet. When he raised his head from
bowing, he said, "Sami'a-l-lahu Liman hamida." A man behind him said,
"Rabbana walaka-l hamd hamdan Kathiran taiyiban mubarakan fihi" (O our
Lord! All the praises are for You, many good and blessed praises). When the
Prophet completed the prayer, he asked, "Who has said these words?" The
man replied, "I." The Prophet said, "I saw over thirty angels competing to
write it first." Prophet rose (from bowing) and stood straight till all the
vertebrae of his spinal column came to a natural position.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 765:
Narrated Thabit:
Anas used to demonstrate to us the prayer of the Prophet and while
demonstrating, he used to raise his head from bowing and stand so long
that we would say that he had forgotten (the prostration).

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 766:
Narrated Al-Bara':
The bowing, the prostrations, the period of standing after bowing and the
interval between the two prostrations of the Prophet used to be equal in
duration .

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 767:
Narrated Aiyub:
Abu Qilaba said, "Malik bin Huwairith used to demonstrate to us the prayer
of the Prophet at times other than that of the compulsory prayers. So
(once) he stood up for prayer and performed a perfect Qiyam (standing and
reciting from the Holy Qur'an) and then bowed and performed bowing
perfectly; then he raised his head and stood straight for a while." Abu Qilaba
added, "Malik bin Huwairith in that demonstration prayed like this Sheikh of
ours, Abu Yazid." Abu, Yazid used to sit (for a while) on raising his head from
the second prostration before getting up.
Volume 1, Book 12, Number 768:
Narrated Abu Bakr bin 'Abdur Rahman Ibn Harith bin Hisham and Abu
Salama bin 'Abdur Rahman:
Abu Huraira used to say Takbir in all the prayers, compulsory and optional -in the month of Ramadan or other months. He used to say Takbir on
standing for prayer and on bowing; then he would say, "Salmi'a-l-lahu Liman
hamida," and before prostrating he would say "Rabbana walaka-l-hamd."
Then he would say Takbir on prostrating and on raising his head from the
prostration, then another Takbir on prostrating (for the second time), and
on raising his head from the prostration. He also would say the Takbir on
standing from the second Rak'a. He used to do the same in every Rak'a till
he completed the prayer. On completion of the prayer, he would say, "By
Him in Whose Hands my soul is! No doubt my prayer is closer to that of
Allah's Apostle than yours, and this was His prayer till he left this world."
And Abu Huraira said, "When Allah's Apostle raised his head from (bowing)
he used to say "Sami' a-l-lahu Liman hamida, Rabbana walakal-hamd." He
Would invoke Allah for some people by naming them: "O Allah! Save AlWalid bin Al-Walid and Salama bin Hisham and 'Aiyash bin Abi Rabi'a and the
weak and the helpless people among the faithful believers O Allah! Be hard
on the tribe of Mudar and let them suffer from famine years like that of the
time of Joseph." In those days the Eastern section of the tribe of Mudar was
against the Prophet.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 769:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle fell from a horse and the right side of his body was injured.
We went to enquire about his health meanwhile it was time for the prayer
and he led the prayer sitting and we also prayed while sitting. On
completion of the prayer he said, "The Imam is to be followed; say Takbir
when he says it; bow when he bows; rise when he rises and when he says
"Sami'a-l-lahu Liman hamida," say, "Rabbana walaka-lhamd", and prostrate
if he prostrates." Sufyan narrated the same from Ma'mar. Ibn Juraij said that
his (the Prophet's) right leg had been injured.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 770:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The people said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall we see our Lord on the Day of
Resurrection?" He replied, "Do you have any doubt in seeing the full moon
on a clear (not cloudy) night?" They replied, "No, O Allah's Apostle!" He said,
"Do you have any doubt in seeing the sun when there are no clouds?" They
replied in the negative. He said, "You will see Allah (your Lord) in the same
way. On the Day of Resurrection, people will be gathered and He will order
the people to follow what they used to worship. So some of them will
follow the sun, some will follow the moon, and some will follow other
deities; and only this nation (Muslims) will be left with its hypocrites. Allah
will come to them and say, 'I am Your Lord.' They will say, 'We shall stay in
this place till our Lord comes to us and when our Lord will come, we will
recognize Him. Then Allah will come to them again and say, 'I am your Lord.'
They will say, 'You are our Lord.' Allah will call them, and As-Sirat (a bridge)
will be laid across Hell and I (Muhammad) shall be the first amongst the
Apostles to cross it with my followers. Nobody except the Apostles will then
be able to speak and they will be saying then, 'O Allah! Save us. O Allah Save
us.'
There will be hooks like the thorns of Sa'dan in Hell. Have you seen the
thorns of Sa'dan?" The people said, "Yes." He said, "These hooks will be like
the thorns of Sa'dan but nobody except Allah knows their greatness in size
and these will entangle the people according to their deeds; some of them
will fall and stay in Hell forever; others will receive punishment (torn into
small pieces) and will get out of Hell, till when Allah intends mercy on
whomever He likes amongst the people of Hell, He will order the angels to
take out of Hell those who worshipped none but Him alone. The angels will
take them out by recognizing them from the traces of prostrations, for Allah
has forbidden the (Hell) fire to eat away those traces. So they will come out
of the Fire, it will eat away from the whole of the human body except the
marks of the prostrations. At that time they will come out of the Fire as
mere skeletons. The Water of Life will be poured on them and as a result
they will grow like the seeds growing on the bank of flowing water. Then
when Allah had finished from the Judgments amongst his creations, one
man will be left between Hell and Paradise and he will be the last man from
the people of Hell to enter paradise. He will be facing Hell, and will say, 'O
Allah! Turn my face from the fire as its wind has dried me and its steam has
burnt me.' Allah will ask him, "Will you ask for anything more in case this
favor is granted to you?' He will say, "No by Your (Honor) Power!" And he
will give to his Lord (Allah) what he will of the pledges and the covenants.
Allah will then turn his face from the Fire. When he will face Paradise and will
see its charm, he will remain quiet as long as Allah will. He then will say, 'O
my Lord! Let me go to the gate of Paradise.' Allah will ask him, 'Didn't you
give pledges and make covenants (to the effect) that you would not ask for
anything more than what you requested at first?' He will say, 'O my Lord! Do
not make me the most wretched, amongst Your creatures.' Allah will say, 'If
this request is granted, will you then ask for anything else?' He will say, 'No!
By Your Power! I shall not ask for anything else.' Then he will give to his Lord
what He will of the pledges and the covenants. Allah will then let him go to
the gate of Paradise. On reaching then and seeing its life, charm, and
pleasure, he will remain quiet as long as Allah wills and then will say, 'O my
Lord ! Let me enter Paradise.' Allah will say, May Allah be merciful unto you,
O son of Adam! How treacherous you are! Haven't you made covenants and
given pledges that you will not ask for anything more that what you have
been given?' He will say, 'O my Lord! Do not make me the most wretched
amongst Your creatures.' So Allah will laugh and allow him to enter Paradise
and will ask him to request as much as he likes. He will do so till all his
desires have been fulfilled . Then Allah will say, 'Request more of such and
such things.' Allah will remind him and when all his desires and wishes; have
been fulfilled, Allah will say "All this is granted to you and a similar amount
besides." Abu Said Al-Khudri, said to Abu Huraira, 'Allah's Apostle said,
"Allah said, 'That is for you and ten times more like it.' "Abu Huraira said, "I
do not remember from Allah's Apostle except (his saying), 'All this is
granted to you and a similar amount besides." Abu Sahd said, "I heard him
saying, 'That is for you and ten times more the like of it."
Volume 1, Book 12, Number 771:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Malik bin Buhaina:
Whenever the Prophet used to offer prayer he used to keep arms away
(from the body) so that the whiteness of his armpits was visible.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 772:
Narrated Abu Wail:
Hudhaifa said, "I saw a person not performing his bowing and prostrations
perfectly. When he completed the prayer, I told him that he had not
prayed." I think that Hudhaifa added (i.e. said to the man), "Had you died,
you would have died on a tradition other than that of the Prophet
Muhammad."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 773:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet was ordered (by Allah) to prostrate on seven parts and not to
tuck up the clothes or hair (while praying). Those parts are: the forehead
(along with the tip of nose), both hands, both knees, and (toes of) both
feet.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 774:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "We have been ordered to prostrates on seven bones and
not to tuck up the clothes or hair."
Volume 1, Book 12, Number 775:
Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib:
(and he was not a liar) We used to pray behind the Prophet and when he
said, "Sami' a-l-lahu Liman hamida", none of us would bend his back (to go
for prostration) till the Prophet had placed his, forehead on the ground.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 776:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "I have been ordered to prostrate on seven bones i.e. on
the forehead along with the tip of the nose and the Prophet pointed
towards his nose, both hands, both knees and the toes of both feet and not
to gather the clothes or the hair."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 777:
Narrated Abu Salama:
Once I went to Abu- Sa'id Al-Khudri and asked him, "Won't you come with us
to the date-palm trees to have a talk?" So Abu Said went out and I asked
him, "Tell me what you heard from the Prophet about the Night of Qadr."
Abu Said replied, "Once Allah's Apostle performed I'tikaf (seclusion) on the
first ten days of the month of Ramadan and we did the same with him.
Gabriel came to him and said, 'The night you are looking for is ahead of you.'
So the Prophet performed the I'tikaf in the middle (second) ten days of the
month of Ramadan and we too performed I'tikaf with him. Gabriel came to
him and said, 'The night which you are looking for is ahead of you.' In the
morning of the 20th of Ramadan the Prophet delivered a sermon saying,
'Whoever has performed I'tikaf with me should continue it. I have been
shown the Night of "Qadr", but have forgotten its date, but it is in the odd
nights of the last ten nights. I saw in my dream that I was prostrating in mud
and water.' In those days the roof of the mosque was made of branches of
date-palm trees. At that time the sky was clear and no cloud was visible, but
suddenly a cloud came and it rained. The Prophet led us in the prayer and I
saw the traces of mud on the forehead and on the nose of Allah's Apostle.
So it was the confirmation of that dream."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 778:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:
The people used to pray with the Prophet tying their Izars around their
necks because of their small sizes and the women were directed that they
should not raise their heads from the prostrations till the men had sat
straight.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 779:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet was ordered to prostrate on seven bony parts and not to tuck
up his clothes or hair.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 780:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "I have been ordered to prostrate on seven (bones) and
not to tuck up the hair or garment."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 781:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to say frequently in his bowing and prostrations
"Subhanaka-Allahumma Rabbana Wabihamdika, Allahumma Ighfir-li" (I
honor Allah from all what (unsuitable things) is ascribed to Him, O Allah! Our
Lord! All praises are for You. O Allah! Forgive me). In this way he was acting
on what was explained to him in the Holy Qur'an.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 782:
Narrated Abu Qilaba:
Once Malik bin Huwairith said to his friends, "Shall I show you how Allah's
Apostle used to offer his prayers?" And it was not the time for any of the
compulsory congregational prayers. So he stood up (for the prayer) bowed
and said the Takbir, then he raised his head and remained standing for a
while and then prostrated and raised his head for a while (sat up for a
while). He prayed like our Sheikh 'Amr Ibn Salama. (Aiyub said, "The latter
used to do a thing which I did not see the people doing i.e. he used to sit
between the third and the fourth Rak'a). IMalik bin Huwairith said, "We
came to the Prophet (after embracing Islam) and stayed with him. He said to
us, 'When you go back to your families, pray such and such a prayer at such
and such a time, pray such and such a prayer at such and such a time, and
when there is the time for the prayer then only of you should pronounce the
Adhan for the prayer and the oldest of you should lead the prayer."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 783:
Narrated Al-Bara':
The time taken by the Prophet in prostrations, bowing, and the sitting
interval between the two prostrations was about the same.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 784:
Narrated Thabit:
Anas said, "I will leave no stone unturned in making you offer the prayer as I
have seen the Prophet making us offer it." Anas used to do a thing which I
have not seen you doing. He used to stand after the bowing for such a long
time that one would think that he had forgotten (the prostrations) and he
used to sit in-between the prostrations so long that one would think that he
had forgotten the second prostration.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 785:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "Be straight in the prostrations and none of you should
put his forearms on the ground (in the prostration) like a dog."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 786:
Narrated Malik bin Huwairith Al-Laithi:
I saw the Prophet praying and in the odd Rakat, he used to sit for a moment
before getting up.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 787:
Narrated Aiyub:
Abu Qilaba said, "Malik bin Huwairith came to us and led us in the prayer in
this mosque of ours and said, 'I lead you in prayer but I do not want to offer
the prayer but just to show you how Allah's Apostle performed his prayers."
I asked Abu Qilaba, "How was the prayer of Malik bin Huwairith?" He replied,
"Like the prayer of this Sheikh of ours-- i.e. 'Amr bin Salima." That Sheikh
used to pronounce the Takbir perfectly and when he raised his head from
the second prostration he would sit for a while and then support himself on
the ground and get up.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 788:
Narrated Said bin Al-Harith:
Abu Said led us in the prayer and said the Takbir aloud on arising from the
prostration, and on prostrating, on rising again, and on getting up from the
second Rak'a. Abu Said said, "I saw the Prophet doing the same."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 789:
Narrated Mutarrif:
'Imran and I prayed behind 'Ali bin Abi Talib and he said Takbir on
prostrating, on rising and on getting up after the two Rakat (i.e. after the
second Rak'a). When the prayer was finished, 'Imran took me by the hand
and said, "He ('Ali) has prayed the prayer of Muhammad" (or said, "He made
us remember the prayer of Muhammad)."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 790:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abdullah:
I saw 'Abdullah bin 'Umar crossing his legs while sitting in the prayer and I, a
mere youngster in those days, did the same. Ibn 'Umar forbade me to do so,
and said, "The proper way is to keep the right foot propped up and bend the
left in the prayer." I said questioningly, "But you are doing so (crossing the
legs)." He said, "My feet cannot bear my weight."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 791:
Narrated Muhammad bin 'Amr bin 'Ata':
I was sitting with some of the companions of Allah's Apostle and we were
discussing about the way of praying of the Prophet. Abu Humaid As-Saidi
said, "I remember the prayer of Allah's Apostle better than any one of you. I
saw him raising both his hands up to the level of the shoulders on saying the
Takbir; and on bowing he placed his hands on both knees and bent his back
straight, then he stood up straight from bowing till all the vertebrate took
their normal positions. In prostrations, he placed both his hands on the
ground with the forearms away from the ground and away from his body,
and his toes were facing the Qibla. On sitting In the second Rak'a he sat on
his left foot and propped up the right one; and in the last Rak'a he pushed
his left foot forward and kept the other foot propped up and sat over the
buttocks "

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 792:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Buhaina:
(he was from the tribe of Uzd Shan'u'a and was the ally of the tribe of
'Abdul-Manaf and was one of the companions of the Prophet): Once the
Prophet led us in the Zuhr prayer and stood up after the second Rak'a and
did not sit down. The people stood up with him. When the prayer was about
to end and the people were waiting for him to say the Taslim, he said Takbir
while sitting and prostrated twice before saying the Taslim and then he said
the Taslim."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 793:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Malik bin Buhaina:
Once Allah's Apostle led us in the Zuhr prayer and got up (after the
prostrations of the second Rak'a) although he should have sat (for the
Tashah-hud). So at the end of the prayer, he prostrated twice while sitting
(prostrations of Sahu).

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 794:
Narrated Shaqlq bin Salama:
'Abdullah said, "Whenever we prayed behind the Prophet we used to recite
(in sitting) 'Peace be on Gabriel, Michael, peace be on so and so. Once
Allah's Apostle looked back at us and said, 'Allah Himself is As-Salam
(Peace), and if anyone of you prays then he should say, At-Tahiyatu lil-lahi
wassalawatu wat-taiyibatu. AsSalamu 'alalika aiyuha-n-Nabiyu wa rahmatu-llahi wa barakatuhu. As-Salam alaina wa ala ibadil-lah is-salihin. (All the
compliments, prayers and good things are due to Allah: peace be on you, O
Prophet and Allah's mercy and blessings be on you. Peace be on us an on
the true pious slaves of Allah). (If you say that, it will be for all the slaves in
the heaven and the earth). Ash-hadu an la-ilaha illa-l-lahu wa ash-hadu anna
Muhammadan 'abduhu wa Rasuluhu. (I testify that none has the right to be
worshipped but Allah and I also testify that Muhammad is His slave and His
Apostle)."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 795:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle used to invoke Allah in the prayer
saying "Allahumma inni a'udhu bika min adhabil-qabri, wa a'udhu bika min
fitnatil-masihid-dajjal, wa a'udhu bika min fitnatil-mahya wa fitnatil-mamati.
Allahumma inni a'udhu bika minal-ma thami wal-maghrami. (O Allah, I seek
refuge with You from the punishment of the grave and from the afflictions
of Masi,h Ad-Dajjal and from the afflictions of life and death. O Allah, I seek
refuge with You from the sins and from being in debt)." Somebody said to
him, "Why do you so frequently seek refuge with Allah from being in debt?"
The Prophet replied, "A person in debt tells lies whenever he speaks, and
breaks promises whenever he makes (them)." 'Aisha also narrated: I heard
Allah's Apostle in his prayer seeking refuge with Allah from the afflictions of
Ad-dajjal.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 796:
Narrated Abu Bakr As-Siddiq:
I asked Allah's Apostle to teach me an invocation so that I may invoke Allah
with it in my prayer. He told me to say, "Allahumma inni zalumtu nafsi
zulman kathiran, Wala yaghfirudhdhunuba illa anta faghfirli maghfiratan min
'Indika, war-hamni innaka antal-ghafururrahim (O Allah! I have done great
injustice to myself and none except You forgives sins, so please forgive me
and be Merciful to me as You are the Forgiver, the Merciful)."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 797:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
When we prayed with the Prophet we used to say, "Peace be on Allah from
His slaves and peace be on so and so." The Prophet said, "Don't say AsSalam be on Allah, for He Himself is As-Salam, but say, 'At-tahiyatu lil-lahi
was-salawatu wat-taiyibatu. As-salamu 'Alaika aiyuhan-Nabiyu warahmatu-llahi wa barakatuhu. As-salamu 'alaina wa 'ala ibadillahis-salihin. (If you say
this then it will be for all the slaves in heaven or between heaven and earth).
Ashhadu an la-ilaha illallahu wa ashhadu anna Muhammadan 'Abduhu wa
Rasuluhu.' Then select the invocation you like best and recite it." (See
Hadith No. 794, 795 & 796).

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 798:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
I saw Allah's Apostle prostrating in mud and water and saw the mark of mud
on his forehead.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 799:
Narrated Um Salama:
Whenever Allah's Apostle finished his prayers with Taslim, the women
would get up and he would stay on for a while in his place before getting up.
Ibn Shihab said, "I think (and Allah knows better), that the purpose of his
stay was that the women might leave before the men who had finished their
prayer. "
Volume 1, Book 12, Number 800:
Narrated 'Itban bin Malik:
We prayed with the Prophet and used to finish our prayer with the Taslim
along with him.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 801:
Narrated Mahmud bin Ar-Rabi':
I remember Allah's Apostle and also the mouthful of water which he took
from a bucket in our house and ejected (on me). I heard from ltban bin Malik
Al-Ansari, who was one from Bani Salim, saying, "I used to lead my tribe of
Bani Salim in prayer. Once I went to the Prophet and said to him, 'I have
weak eye-sight and at times the rainwater flood intervenes between me and
the mosque of my tribe and I wish that you would come to my house and
pray at some place so that I could take that place as a place for praying
(mosque). He said, "Allah willing, I shall do that." Next day Allah's Apostle
along with Abu Bakr, came to my house after the sun had risen high and he
asked permission to enter. I gave him permission, but he didn't sit till he said
to me, "Where do you want me to pray in your house?" I pointed to a place
in the house where I wanted him to pray. So he stood up for the prayer and
we aligned behind him. He completed the prayer with Taslim and we did the
same simultaneously."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 802:
Narrated Abu Ma'bad:
(the freed slave of Ibn 'Abbas) Ibn 'Abbas told me, "In the lifetime of the
Prophet it was the custom to celebrate Allah's praises aloud after the
compulsory congregational prayers." Ibn 'Abbas further said, "When I heard
the Dhikr, I would learn that the compulsory congregational prayer had
ended."
Volume 1, Book 12, Number 803:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
I used to recognize the completion of the prayer of the Prophet by hearing
Takbir.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 804:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Some poor people came to the Prophet and said, "The wealthy people will
get higher grades and will have permanent enjoyment and they pray like us
and fast as we do. They have more money by which they perform the Hajj,
and 'Umra; fight and struggle in Allah's Cause and give in charity." The
Prophet said, "Shall I not tell you a thing upon which if you acted you would
catch up with those who have surpassed you? Nobody would overtake you
and you would be better than the people amongst whom you live except
those who would do the same. Say "Sub-han-al-lah", "Alhamdu-lillah" and
"Allahu Akbar" thirty three times each after every (compulsory) prayer." We
differed and some of us said that we should say, "Subhan-al-lah" thirty three
times and "Alhamdu lillah" thirty three times and "Allahu Akbar" thirty four
times. I went to the Prophet who said, "Say, "Subhan-al-lah" and "Alhamdu
lillah" and "Allahu Akbar" all together for thirty three times."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 805:
Narrated Warrad:
(the clerk of Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba) Once Al-Mughira dictated to me in a
letter addressed to Mu'awiya that the Prophet used to say after every
compulsory prayer, "La ilaha ilallah wahdahu la sharika lahu, lahul-mulku walahul-hamdu, wahuwa ala kulli shai in qadir. Allahumma la mani 'a lima
a'taita, wa la mu'tiya lima mana'ta, wa la yanfa'u dhal-jaddi minka-l-jadd.
(None has the right to be worshipped but Allah and He has no partner in
Lordship or in worship or in the Names and the Qualities, and for Him is the
Kingdom and all the praises are for Him and He is omnipotent. O Allah!
Nobody can hold back what you give and nobody can give what You hold
back. Hard (efforts by anyone for anything cannot benefit one against Your
Will)." And Al-Hasan said, "Al-jadd' means prosperity."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 806:
Narrated Samura bin Jundab:
The Prophet used to face us on completion of the prayer.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 807:
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani:
The Prophet led us in the Fajr prayer at Hudaibiya after a rainy night. On
completion of the prayer, he faced the people and said, "Do you know what
your Lord has said (revealed)?" The people replied, "Allah and His Apostle
know better." He said, "Allah has said, 'In this morning some of my slaves
remained as true believers and some became non-believers; whoever said
that the rain was due to the Blessings and the Mercy of Allah had belief in
Me and he disbelieves in the stars, and whoever said that it rained because
of a particular star had no belief in Me but believes in that star.' "

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 808:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Once the Prophet delayed the 'Isha' prayer until midnight and then came to
us. Having prayed he faced us and said, "The people had prayed and slept
but you were in the prayer as long as you were waiting for it."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 809:
Narrated Um Salama
"The Prophet after finishing the prayer with Taslim used to stay at his place
for a while." Ibn Shihab said, "I think (and Allah knows better), that he used
to wait for the departure of the women who had prayed." Ibn Shihab wrote
that he had heard it from Hind bint Al-Harith Al-Firasiya from Um Salama, the
wife of the Prophet (Hind was from the companions of Um Salama) who
said, "When the Prophet finished the prayer with Taslim, the women would
depart and enter their houses before Allah's Apostle departed."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 810:
Narrated 'Uqba:
I offered the 'Asr prayer behind the Prophet at Medina. When he had
finished the prayer with Taslim, he got up hurriedly and went out by crossing
the rows of the people to one of the dwellings of his wives. The people got
scared at his speed . The Prophet came back and found the people surprised
at his haste and said to them, "I remembered a piece of gold Lying in my
house and I did not like it to divert my attention from Allah's worship, so I
have ordered it to be distributed (in charity)."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 811:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
You should not give away a part of your prayer to Satan by thinking that it is
necessary to depart (after finishing the prayer) from one's right side only; I
have seen the Prophet often leave from the left side.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 812:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
During the holy battle of Khaibar the Prophet said, "Whoever ate from this
plant (i.e. garlic) should not enter our mosque."
Volume 1, Book 12, Number 813:
Narrated 'Ata':
I heard Jabir bin 'Abdullah saying, "The Prophet said, 'Whoever eats (from)
this plant (he meant garlic) should keep away from our mosque." I said,
"What does he mean by that?" He replied, "I think he means only raw
garlic."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 814:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "Whoever eats garlic or onion should keep away from our
mosque or should remain in his house." (Jabir bin 'Abdullah, in another
narration said, "Once a big pot containing cooked vegetables was brought.
On finding unpleasant smell coming from it, the Prophet asked, 'What is in
it?' He was told all the names of the vegetables that were in it. The Prophet
ordered that it should be brought near to some of his companions who
were with him. When the Prophet saw it he disliked to eat it and said, 'Eat. (I
don't eat) for I converse with those whom you don't converse with (i.e. the
angels)."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 815:
Narrated 'Abdul 'Aziz:
A man asked Anas, "What did you hear from the Prophet about garlic?" He
said, "The Prophet said, 'Whoever has eaten this plant should neither come
near us nor pray with us."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 816:
Narrated Sulaiman Ash-Shaibam:
I heard Ash-Sha'bi saying, "A person who was accompanying the Prophet
passed by a grave that was separated from the other graves told me that
the Prophet once led the people in the (funeral) prayer and the people had
aligned behind him. I said, "O Aba 'Amr! Who told you about it?" He said,
"Ibn Abbas."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 817:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said, "Ghusl (taking a bath) on Friday is compulsory for every
Muslim reaching the age of puberty."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 818:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
One night I slept at the house of my aunt Maimuna and the Prophet slept
(too). He got up (for prayer) in the last hours of the night and performed a
light ablution from a hanging leather skin. ('Amr, the sub-narrator described
that the ablution was very light). Then he stood up for prayer and I got up
too and performed the ablution in the same way and joined him on his left
side. He pulled me to the right and prayed as much as Allah will. Then he lay
down and slept and I heard his breath sounds till the Mu'adh-dhin came to
him to inform him about the (Fajr) prayer. He left with him for the prayer
and prayed without repeating the ablution. (Sufyan the subnarrator said:
We said to 'Amr, "Some people say, 'The eyes of the Prophet sleep but his
heart never sleeps.' " 'Amr said, "'Ubai bin 'Umar said, 'The dreams of the
Prophets are Divine Inspirations. Then he recited, '(O my son), I have seen in
dream that I was slaughtering you (offering you in sacrifice).") (37.102)

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 819:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
My grandmother Mulaika invited Allah's Apostle for a meal which she had
prepared specially for him. He ate some of it and said, "Get up. I shall lead
you in the prayer." I brought a mat that had become black owing to
excessive use and I sprinkled water on it. Allah's Apostle stood on it and
prayed two Rakat; and the orphan was with me (in the first row), and the
old lady stood behind us.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 820:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Once I came riding a she-ass and I, then, had just attained the age of
puberty. Allah's Apostle was leading the people in prayer at Mina facing no
wall. I passed in front of the row and let loose the she-ass for grazing and
joined the row and no one objected to my deed.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 821:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Once Allah's Apostle delayed the 'Isha' prayer till 'Umar informed him that
the women and children had slept. Then Allah's Apostle came out and said:
"None from amongst the dwellers of earth have prayed this prayer except
you." In those days none but the people of Medina prayed.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 822:
Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin 'Abis:
A person asked Ibn Abbas, "Have you ever presented yourself at the ('Id)
prayer with Allah's Apostle?" He replied, "Yes." And had it not been for my
kinship (position) with the Prophet it would not have been possible for me
to do so (for he was too young). The Prophet went to the mark near the
house of Kathir bin As-Salt and delivered a sermon. He then went towards
the women. He advised and reminded them and asked them to give alms. So
the woman would bring her hand near her neck and take off her necklace
and put it in the garment of Bilal. Then the Prophet and Bilal came to the
house."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 823:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Once Allah's Apostle delayed the 'Isha' prayer till 'Umar informed him that
the women and children had slept. The Prophet came out and said, "None
except you from amongst the dwellers of earth is waiting for this prayer." In
those days, there was no prayer except in Medina and they used to pray the
'Isha' prayer between the disappearance of the twilight and the first third of
the night.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 824:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "If your women ask permission to go to the mosque at
night, allow them."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 825:
Narrated Um Salama:
(the wife of the Prophet) In the lifetime of Allah's Apostle the women used
to get up when they finished their compulsory prayers with Taslim. The
Prophet and the men would stay on at their places as long as Allah will.
When the Prophet got up, the men would then get up.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 826:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When Allah's Apostle finished the Fajr prayer, the women would leave
covered in their sheets and were not recognized owing to the darkness.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 827:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada Al-Ansari:
My father said, "Allah's Apostle said, "Whenever I stand for prayer, I want to
prolong it but on hearing the cries of a child, I would shorten it as I dislike to
put its mother in trouble."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 828:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Had Allah's Apostle known what the women were doing, he would have
forbidden them from going to the mosque as the women of Bani Israel had
been forbidden. Yahya bin Said (a sub-narrator) asked 'Amra (another subnarrator), "Were the women of Bani Israel forbidden?" She replied "Yes."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 829:
Narrated Um Salama:
Whenever Allah's Apostle completed the prayer with Taslim, the women
used to get up immediately and Allah's Apostle would remain at his place for
someone before getting up. (The sub-narrator (Az-Zuhri) said, "We think,
and Allah knows better, that he did so, so that the women might leave
before men could get in touch with them)."

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 830:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet prayed in the house of Um Sulaim; and I, along with an orphan
stood behind him while Um Sulaim (stood) behind us.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 831:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle used to offer the Fajr prayer when it was still dark and the
believing women used to return (after finishing their prayer) and nobody
could recognize them owing to darkness, or they could not recognize one
another.

Volume 1, Book 12, Number 832:
Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah:
My father said, "The Prophet said, 'If the wife of any one of you asks
permission (to go to the mosque) do not forbid her."
VOLUME 2
BOOK 13. FRIDAY PRAYER (1-63)
Volume 2, Book 13, Number 1:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) saying, "We (Muslims) are the last (to come)
but (will be) the foremost on the Day of Resurrection though the former
nations were given the Holy Scriptures before us. And this was their day
(Friday) the celebration of which was made compulsory for them but they
differed about it. So Allah gave us the guidance for it (Friday) and all the
other people are behind us in this respect: the Jews' (holy day is) tomorrow
(i.e. Saturday) and the Christians' (is) the day after tomorrow (i.e. Sunday)."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 2:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "Anyone of you attending the Friday (prayers)
should take a bath."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 3:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
While Umar bin Al-Khattab was standing and delivering the sermon on a
Friday, one of the companions of the Prophet, who was one of the foremost
Muhajirs (emigrants) came. 'Umar said to him, "What is the time now?" He
replied, "I was busy and could not go back to my house till I heard the
Adhan. I did not perform more than the ablution." Thereupon 'Umar said to
him, "Did you perform only the ablution although you know that Allah's
Apostle (p.b.u.h) used to order us to take a bath (on Fridays)?"

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 4:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "The taking of a bath on Friday is compulsory
for every male (Muslim) who has attained the age of puberty."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 5:
Narrated Abu Said:
I testify that Allah's Apostle said, "The taking of a bath on Friday is
compulsory for every male Muslim who has attained the age of puberty and
(also) the cleaning of his teeth with Siwak, and the using of perfume if it is
available." Amr (a sub-narrator) said, "I confirm that the taking of a bath is
compulsory, but as for the Siwak and the using of perfume, Allah knows
better whether it is obligatory or not, but according to the Hadith it is as
above.")

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 6:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "Any person who takes a bath on Friday like
the bath of Janaba and then goes for the prayer (in the first hour i.e. early),
it is as if he had sacrificed a camel (in Allah's cause); and whoever goes in the
second hour it is as if he had sacrificed a cow; and whoever goes in the third
hour, then it is as if he had sacrificed a horned ram; and if one goes in the
fourth hour, then it is as if he had sacrificed a hen; and whoever goes in the
fifth hour then it is as if he had offered an egg. When the Imam comes out
(i.e. starts delivering the Khutba), the angels present themselves to listen to
the Khutba."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 7:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
While 'Umar (bin Al-Khattab) was delivering the Khutba on a Friday, a man
entered (the mosque). 'Umar asked him, "What has detained you from the
prayer?" The man said, "It was only that when I heard the Adhan I
performed ablution (for the prayer)." On that 'Umar said, "Did you not hear
the Prophet saying: 'Anyone of you going out for the Jumua prayer should
take a bath'?".

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 8:
Narrated Salman-Al-Farsi:
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Whoever takes a bath on Friday, purifies himself
as much as he can, then uses his (hair) oil or perfumes himself with the scent
of his house, then proceeds (for the Jumua prayer) and does not separate
two persons sitting together (in the mosque), then prays as much as (Allah
has) written for him and then remains silent while the Imam is delivering the
Khutba, his sins in-between the present and the last Friday would be
forgiven."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 9:
Narrated Tawus:
I said to Ibn 'Abbas, "The people are narrating that the Prophet said, 'Take a
bath on Friday and wash your heads (i.e. take a thorough bath) even though
you were not Junub and use perfume'." On that Ibn 'Abbas replied, "I know
about the bath, (i.e. it is essential) but I do not know about the perfume (i.e.
whether it is essential or not.)~

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 10:
Narrated Tawus:
Ibn 'Abbas mentioned the statement of the Prophet regarding the taking of
a bath on Friday and then I asked him whether the Prophet (p.b.u.h) had
ordered perfume or (hair) oil to be used if they could be found in one's
house. He (Ibn 'Abbas) replied that he did not know about it.

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 11:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Umar bin Al-Khattab saw a silken cloak (being sold) at the gate of the
Mosque and said to Allah's Apostle, "I wish you would buy this to wear on
Fridays and also on occasions of the arrivals of the delegations." Allah's
Apostle replied, "This will be worn by a person who will have no share
(reward) in the Hereafter." Later on similar cloaks were given to Allah's
Apostle and he gave one of them to 'Umar bin Al-Khattab. On that 'Umar
said, "O Allah's Apostle! You have given me this cloak although on the cloak
of Atarid (a cloak merchant who was selling that silken cloak at the gate of
the mosque) you passed such and such a remark." Allah's Apostle replied, "I
have not given you this to wear". And so 'Umar bin Al-Khattab gave it to his
pagan brother in Mecca to wear.

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 12:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If I had not found it hard for my followers or the
people, I would have ordered them to clean their teeth with Siwak for every
prayer."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 13:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle I said, "I have told you repeatedly to (use) the Siwak. (The
Prophet put emphasis on the use of the Siwak.)
Volume 2, Book 13, Number 14:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
When the Prophet (p.b.u.h) got up at night (for the night prayer), he used to
clean his mouth .

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 15:
Narrated 'Aisha:
AbdurRahman bin Abi Bakr came holding a Siwak with which he was
cleaning his teeth. Allah's Apostle looked at him. I requested Abdur-Rahman
to give the Siwak to me and after he gave it to me I divided it, chewed it and
gave it to Allah's Apostle. Then he cleaned his teeth with it and (at that time)
he was resting against my chest.

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 16:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet used to recite the following in the Fajr prayer of Friday, "Alif,
Lam, Mim, Tanzil" (Surat-as-Sajda #32) and "Hal-ata-ala-l-Insani" (i.e. SurahAd-Dahr #76).

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 17:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The first Jumua prayer which was offered after a Jumua prayer offered at
the mosque of Allah's Apostle took place in the mosque of the tribe of
'Abdul Qais at Jawathi in Bahrain.

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 18:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "All of you are Guardians." Yunis said: Ruzaiq
bin Hukaim wrote to Ibn Shihab while I was with him at Wadi-al-Qura saying,
"Shall I lead the Jumua prayer?" Ruzaiq was working on the land (i.e
farming) and there was a group of Sudanese people and some others with
him; Ruzaiq was then the Governor of Aila. Ibn Shihab wrote (to Ruzaiq)
ordering him to lead the Jumua prayer and telling him that Salim told him
that 'Abdullah bin 'Umar had said, "I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'All of you
are guardians and responsible for your wards and the things under your
care. The Imam (i.e. ruler) is the guardian of his subjects and is responsible
for them and a man is the guardian of his family and is responsible for them.
A woman is the guardian of her husband's house and is responsible for it. A
servant is the guardian of his master's belongings and is responsible for
them.' I thought that he also said, 'A man is the guardian of his father's
property and is responsible for it. All of you are guardians and responsible
for your wards and the things under your care."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 19:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Anyone of you coming for the Jumua prayer
should take a bath."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 20:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle said, "The taking of a bath on Friday is compulsory for every
Muslim who has attained the age of puberty."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 21:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said "We are the last (to come amongst the nations) but (will
be) the foremost on the Day of Resurrection. They were given the Holy
Scripture before us and we were given the Quran after them. And this was
the day (Friday) about which they differed and Allah gave us the guidance
(for that). So tomorrow (i.e. Saturday) is the Jews' (day), and the day after
tomorrow (i.e. Sunday) is the Christians'." The Prophet (p.b.u.h) remained
silent (for a while) and then said, "It is obligatory for every Muslim that he
should take a bath once in seven days, when he should wash his head and
body."
Narrated Abu Huraira through different narrators that the Prophet said, "It
is Allah's right on every Muslim that he should take a bath (at least) once in
seven days."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 22:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Allow women to go to the Mosques at night."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 23:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
One of the wives of Umar (bin Al-Khattab) used to offer the Fajr and the
'Isha' prayer in congregation in the Mosque. She was asked why she had
come out for the prayer as she knew that Umar disliked it, and he has great
ghaira (self-respect). She replied, "What prevents him from stopping me
from this act?" The other replied, "The statement of Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h)
: 'Do not stop Allah's women-slave from going to Allah s Mosques' prevents
him."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 24:
Narrated Muhammad bin Sirin:
On a rainy day Ibn Abbas said to his Muadh-dhin, "After saying, 'Ash-hadu
anna Muhammadan Rasulullah' (I testify that Muhammad is Allah's Apostle),
do not say 'Haiya 'Alas-Salat' (come for the prayer) but say 'Pray in your
houses'." (The man did so). But the people disliked it. Ibn Abbas said, "It was
done by one who was much better than I (i.e. the Prophet (p.b.u.h) ). No
doubt, the Jumua prayer is compulsory but I dislike to put you to task by
bringing you out walking in mud and slush."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 25:
Narrated Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) The people used to come from their abodes and
from Al-'Awali (i.e. outskirts of Medina up to a distance of four miles or more
from Medina). They used to pass through dust and used to be drenched
with sweat and covered with dust; so sweat used to trickle from them. One
of them came to Allah's Apostle who was in my house. The Prophet said to
him, "I wish that you keep yourself clean on this day of yours (i.e. take a
bath)."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 26:
Narrated Yahya bin Said:
I asked 'Amra about taking a bath on Fridays. She replied, " Aisha said, 'The
people used to work (for their livelihood) and whenever they went for the
Jumua prayer, they used to go to the mosque in the same shape as they had
been in work. So they were asked to take a bath on Friday.' "

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 27:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet used to offer the Jumua prayer immediately after mid-day.
Volume 2, Book 13, Number 28:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
We used to offer the Jumua prayer early and then have an afternoon nap.

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 29:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet used to offer the prayer earlier if it was very cold; and if it was
very hot he used to delay the prayer, i.e. the Jumua prayer.

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 30:
Narrated Abu 'Abs:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Anyone whose feet are covered with dust in
Allah's cause, shall be saved by Allah from the Hell-Fire."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 31:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
heard Allah's Apostles (p.b.u.h) saying, "If the prayer is started do not run
for it but just walk for it calmly and pray whatever you get, and complete
whatever is missed. "

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 32:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada on the authority of his father:
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Do not stand up (for prayer) unless you see me,
and observe calmness and solemnity".
Volume 2, Book 13, Number 33:
Narrated Salman Al-Farsi:
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "Anyone who takes a bath on Friday and
cleans himself as much as he can and puts oil (on his hair) or scents himself;
and then proceeds for the prayer and does not force his way between two
persons (assembled in the mosque for the Friday prayer), and prays as much
as is written for him and remains quiet when the Imam delivers the Khutba,
all his sins in between the present and the last Friday will be forgiven."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 34:
Narrated Ibn Juraij:
I heard Nazi' saying, "Ibn Umar, said, 'The Prophet forbade that a man
should make another man to get up to sit in his place' ". I said to Nafi', 'Is it
for Jumua prayer only?' He replied, "For Jumua prayer and any other
(prayer)."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 35:
Narrated As-Saib bin Yazid:
In the life-time of the Prophet, Abu Bakr and Umar, the Adhan for the Jumua
prayer used to be pronounced when the Imam sat on the pulpit. But during
the Caliphate of 'Uthman when the Muslims increased in number, a third
Adhan at Az-Zaura' was added. Abu 'Abdullah said, "Az-Zaura' is a place in
the market of Medina."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 36:
Narrated As-Saib bin Yazid:
The person who increased the number of Adhans for the Jumua prayers to
three was Uthman bin Affan and it was when the number of the (Muslim)
people of Medina had increased. In the life-time of the Prophet there was
only one Muadh-dhin and the Adhan used to be pronounced only after the
Imam had taken his seat (i.e. on the pulpit).

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 37:
Narrated Abu Umama bin Sahl bin Hunaif:
I heard Muawiya bin Abi Sufyan (repeating the statements of the Adhan)
while he was sitting on the pulpit. When the Muadh-dhin pronounced the
Adhan saying, "Allahu-Akbar, Allahu Akbar", Muawiya said: "Allah Akbar,
Allahu Akbar." And when the Muadh-dhin said, "Ash-hadu an la ilaha illal-lah
(I testify that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah)", Muawiya
said, "And (so do) I". When he said, "Ash-hadu anna Muhammadan
Rasulullah" (I testify that Muhammad is Allah's Apostle), Muawiya said,
"And (so do) I". When the Adhan was finished, Muawiya said, "O people,
when the Muadh-dhin pronounced the Adhan I heard Allah's Apostle on this
very pulpit saying what you have just heard me saying".

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 38:
Narrated As-Sa'ib bin Yazid I :
'Uthman bin 'Affan introduced the second Adhan on Fridays when the
number of the people in the mosque increased. Previously the Adhan on
Fridays used to be pronounced only after the Imam had taken his seat (on
the pulpit).

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 39:
Narrated Az-Zuhri:
I heard As-Saib bin Yazid, saying, "In the life-time of Allah's Apostle, and Abu
Bakr and Umar, the Adhan for the Jumua prayer used to be pronounced
after the Imam had taken his seat on the pulpit. But when the people
increased in number during the caliphate of 'Uthman, he introduced a third
Adhan (on Friday for the Jumua prayer) and it was pronounced at Az-Zaura'
and that new state of affairs remained so in the succeeding years.

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 40:
Narrated Abu Hazim bin Dinar:
Some people went to Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi and told him that they had
different opinions regarding the wood of the pulpit. They asked him about it
and he said, "By Allah, I know of what wood the pulpit was made, and no
doubt I saw it on thy very first day when Allah's Apostle I took his seat on it.
Allah's Apostle sent for such and such an Ansari woman (and Sahl
mentioned her name) and said to her, 'Order your slave-carpenter to
prepare for me some pieces of wood (i.e. pulpit) on which I may sit at the
time of addressing the people.' So she ordered her slave-carpenter and he
made it from the tamarisk of the forest and brought it (to the woman). The
woman sent that (pulpit) to Allah's Apostle who ordered it to be placed
here. Then I saw Allah's Apostle praying on it and then bowed on it. Then he
stepped back, got down and prostrated on the ground near the foot of the
pulpit and again ascended the pulpit. After finishing the prayer he faced the
people and said, 'I have done this so that you may follow me and learn the
way I pray.' "

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 41:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet used to stand by a stem of a date-palm tree (while delivering a
sermon). When the pulpit was placed for him we heard that stem crying like
a pregnant she-camel till the Prophet got down from the pulpit and placed
his hand over it.

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 42:
Narrated Salim:
My father said , "I heard the Prophet delivering the Khutba on the pulpit and
he said, 'Whoever comes for the Jumua prayer should take a bath (before
coming).' "

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 43:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to deliver the Khutba while standing and then he
would sit, then stand again as you do now-a-days.

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 44:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
One day the Prophet sat on the pulpit and we sat around him.

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 45:
Narrated 'Amr bin Taghlib:
Some property or something was brought to Allah's Apostle and he
distributed it. He gave to some men and ignored the others. Later he got the
news of his being admonished by those whom he had ignored. So he
glorified and praised Allah and said, "Amma ba'du. By Allah, I may give to a
man and ignore another, although the one whom I ignore is more beloved
to me than the one whom I give. But I give to some people as I feel that they
have no patience and no contentment in their hearts and I leave those who
are patient and self-contented with the goodness and wealth which Allah
has put into their hearts and 'Amr bin Taghlib is one of them." Amr added,
By Allah! Those words of Allah's Apostle are more beloved to me than the
best red camels.
Volume 2, Book 13, Number 46:
Narrated Aisha:
Once in the middle of the night Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) went out and
prayed in the mosque and some men prayed with him. The next morning the
people spoke about it and so more people gathered and prayed with him (in
the second night). They circulated the news in the morning, and so, on the
third night the number of people increased greatly. Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h)
came out and they prayed behind him. On the fourth night the mosque was
overwhelmed by the people till it could not accommodate them. Allah's
Apostle came out only for the Fajr prayer and when he finished the prayer,
he faced the people and recited "Tashah-hud" (I testify that none has the
right to be worshipped but Allah and that Muhammad is His Apostle), and
then said, "Amma ba'du. Verily your presence (in the mosque at night) was
not hidden from me, but I was afraid that this prayer (Prayer of Tahajjud)
might be made compulsory and you might not be able to carry it out."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 47:
Narrated Abu Hummaid As-Sa'idi
One night Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) stood up after the prayer and recited
"Tashah-hud" and then praised Allah as He deserved and said, "Amma
ba'du."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 48:
Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:
Once Allah's Apostle got up for delivering the Khutba and I heard him after
"Tashah-hud" saying "Amma ba'du."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 49:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Once the Prophet ascended the pulpit and it was the last gathering in which
he took part. He was covering his shoulder with a big cloak and binding his
head with an oily bandage. He glorified and praised Allah and said, "O
people! Come to me." So the people came and gathered around him and he
then said, "Amma ba'du." "From now onward the Ansar will decrease and
other people will increase. So anybody who becomes a ruler of the followers
of Muhammad and has the power to harm or benefit people then he should
accept the good from the benevolent amongst them (Ansar) and overlook
the faults of their wrong-doers."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 50:
Narrated 'Abdullah Ibn Umar:
The Prophet used to deliver two Khutbas and sit in between them

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 51:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "When it is a Friday, the angels stand at the gate of the
mosque and keep on writing the names of the persons coming to the
mosque in succession according to their arrivals. The example of the one
who enters the mosque in the earliest hour is that of one offering a camel
(in sacrifice). The one coming next is like one offering a cow and then a ram
and then a chicken and then an egg respectively. When the Imam comes out
(for Jumua prayer) they (i.e. angels) fold their papers and listen to the
Khutba."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 52:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
A person entered the mosque while the Prophet was delivering the Khutba
on a Friday. The Prophet said to him, "Have you prayed?" The man replied in
the negative. The Prophet said, "Get up and pray two Rakat."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 53:
Narrated Jabir:
A man entered the Mosque while the Prophet was delivering the Khutba.
The Prophet said to him, "Have you prayed?" The man replied in the
negative. The Prophet said, "Pray two Rakat."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 54:
Narrated Anas:
While the Prophet was delivering the Khutba on a Friday, a man stood up
and said, "O, Allah's Apostle! The livestock and the sheep are dying, so pray
to Allah for rain." So he (the Prophet) raised both his hands and invoked
Allah (for it).

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 55:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Once in the lifetime of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) the people were afflicted with
drought (famine). While the Prophet was delivering the Khutba on a Friday,
a Bedouin stood up and said, "O, Allah's Apostle! Our possessions are being
destroyed and the children are hungry; Please invoke Allah (for rain)". So
the Prophet raised his hands. At that time there was not a trace of cloud in
the sky. By Him in Whose Hands my soul is as soon as he lowered his hands,
clouds gathered like mountains, and before he got down from the pulpit, I
saw the rain falling on the beard of the Prophet. It rained that day, the next
day, the third day, the fourth day till the next Friday. The same Bedouin or
another man stood up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! The houses have
collapsed, our possessions and livestock have been drowned; Please invoke
Allah (to protect us)". So the Prophet I raised both his hands and said, "O
Allah! Round about us and not on us". So, in whatever direction he pointed
with his hands, the clouds dispersed and cleared away, and Medina's (sky)
became clear as a hole in between the clouds. The valley of Qanat remained
flooded, for one month, none came from outside but talked about the
abundant rain.

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 56:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "When the Imam is delivering the Khutba, and
you ask your companion to keep quiet and listen, then no doubt you have
done an evil act."

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 57:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) talked about Friday and said, "There is an hour
(opportune time) on Friday and if a Muslim gets it while praying and asks
something from Allah, then Allah will definitely meet his demand." And he
(the Prophet) pointed out the shortness of that time with his hands.

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 58:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
While we were praying (Jumua Khutba & prayer) with the Prophet (p.b.u.h),
some camels loaded with food, arrived (from Sham.~ The people diverted
their attention towards the camels (and left the mosque), and only twelve
persons remained with the Prophet. So this verse was revealed: "But when
they see Some bargain or some amusement, They disperse headlong to it,
And leave you standing." (62.11)
Volume 2, Book 13, Number 59:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:
Allah's Apostle used to pray two Rakat before the Zuhr prayer and two
Rakat after it. He also used to pray two Rakat after the Maghrib prayer in his
house, and two Rakat after the 'Isha' prayer. He never prayed after Jumua
prayer till he departed (from the Mosque), and then he would pray two
Rakat at home.

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 60:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
There was a woman amongst us who had a farm and she used to sow Silq (a
kind of vegetable) on the edges of streams in her farm. On Fridays she used
to pull out the Silq from its roots and put the roots in a utensil. Then she
would put a handful of powdered barley over it and cook it. The roots of the
Silq were a substitute for meat. After finishing the Jumua prayer we used to
greet her and she would give us that food which we would eat with our
hands, and because of that meal, we used to look forward to Friday.

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 61:
Narrated Sahl:
As above with the addition: We never had an afternoon nap nor meals
except after offering the Jumua prayer.

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 62:
Narrated Anas:
We used to offer the Jumua prayer early and then have the afternoon nap.
Volume 2, Book 13, Number 63:
Narrated Sahl:
We used to offer the Jumua prayer with the Prophet and then take the
afternoon nap.
BOOK 14. FEAR PRAYER (64-68)
Volume 2, Book 14, Number 64:
Narrated Shu'aib:
I asked Az-Zuhri, "Did the Prophet ever offer the Fear Prayer?" Az-Zuhri said,
"I was told by Salim that 'Abdullah bin Umar I had said, 'I took part in a holy
battle with Allah's Apostle I in Najd. We faced the enemy and arranged
ourselves in rows. Then Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) stood up to lead the prayer
and one party stood to pray with him while the other faced the enemy.
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) and the former party bowed and performed two
prostrations. Then that party left and took the place of those who had not
prayed. Allah's Apostle prayed one Raka (with the latter) and performed
two prostrations and finished his prayer with Taslim. Then everyone of them
bowed once and performed two prostrations individually.' "

Volume 2, Book 14, Number 65:
Narrated Nafi':
Ibn Umar said something similar to Mujahid's saying: Whenever (Muslims
and non-Muslims) stand face to face in battle, the Muslims can pray while
standing. Ibn Umar added, "The Prophet said, 'If the number of the enemy is
greater than the Muslims, they can pray while standing or riding
(individually).' "

Volume 2, Book 14, Number 66:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Once the Prophet (p.b.u.h) led the fear prayer and the people stood behind
him. He said Takbir (Allahu-Akbar) and the people said the same. He bowed
and some of them bowed. Then he prostrated and they also prostrated.
Then he stood for the second Raka and those who had prayed the first Raka
left and guarded their brothers. The second party joined him and performed
bowing and prostration with him. All the people were in prayer but they
were guarding one another during the prayer.

Volume 2, Book 14, Number 67:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
On the day of the Khandaq Umar came, cursing the disbelievers of Quraish
and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have not offered the 'Asr prayer and the sun
has set." The Prophet replied, "By Allah! I too, have not offered the prayer
yet. "The Prophet then went to Buthan, performed ablution and performed
the 'Asr prayer after the sun had set and then offered the Maghrib prayer
after it."

Volume 2, Book 14, Number 68:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) offered the Fajr prayer when it was still dark, then
he rode and said, 'Allah Akbar! Khaibar is ruined. When we approach near to
a nation, the most unfortunate is the morning of those who have been
warned." The people came out into the streets saying, "Muhammad and his
army." Allah's Apostle vanquished them by force and their warriors were
killed; the children and women were taken as captives. Safiya was taken by
Dihya Al-Kalbi and later she belonged to Allah's Apostle go who married her
and her Mahr was her manumission.
BOOK 15. THE TWO FESTIVALS (EIDS) (69-104)
Volume 2, Book 15, Number 69:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:
Umar bought a silk cloak from the market, took it to Allah's Apostle and
said, "O Allah's Apostle! Take it and adorn yourself with it during the 'Id and
when the delegations visit you." Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) replied, "This dress
is for those who have no share (in the Hereafter)." After a long period
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) sent to Umar a cloak of silk brocade. Umar came to
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) with the cloak and said, "O Allah's Apostle! You said
that this dress was for those who had no share (in the Hereafter); yet you
have sent me this cloak." Allah's Apostle said to him, "Sell it and fulfill your
needs by it."

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 70:
Narrated Aisha:
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) came to my house while two girls were singing
beside me the songs of Buath (a story about the war between the two
tribes of the Ansar, the Khazraj and the Aus, before Islam). The Prophet
(p.b.u.h) lay down and turned his face to the other side. Then Abu Bakr
came and spoke to me harshly saying, "Musical instruments of Satan near
the Prophet (p.b.u.h) ?" Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) turned his face towards
him and said, "Leave them." When Abu Bakr became inattentive, I signalled
to those girls to go out and they left. It was the day of 'Id, and the Black
people were playing with shields and spears; so either I requested the
Prophet (p.b.u.h) or he asked me whether I would like to see the display. I
replied in the affirmative. Then the Prophet (p.b.u.h) made me stand behind
him and my cheek was touching his cheek and he was saying, "Carry on! O
Bani Arfida," till I got tired. The Prophet (p.b.u.h) asked me, "Are you
satisfied (Is that sufficient for you)?" I replied in the affirmative and he told
me to leave.
Volume 2, Book 15, Number 71:
Narrated Al-Bara':
I heard the Prophet (p.b.u.h) delivering a Khutba saying, "The first thing to
be done on this day (first day of 'Id ul Adha) is to pray; and after returning
from the prayer we slaughter our sacrifices (in the name of Allah) and
whoever does so, he acted according to our Sunna (traditions)."

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 72:
Narrated Aisha:
Abu Bakr came to my house while two small Ansari girls were singing beside
me the stories of the Ansar concerning the Day of Buath. And they were not
singers. Abu Bakr said protestingly, "Musical instruments of Satan in the
house of Allah's Apostle !" It happened on the 'Id day and Allah's Apostle
said, "O Abu Bakr! There is an 'Id for every nation and this is our 'Id."

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 73:
Narrated Anas bin Malik,:
Allah's Apostle never proceeded (for the prayer) on the Day of 'Id-ul-Fitr
unless he had eaten some dates. Anas also narrated: The Prophet used to
eat odd number of dates.

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 74:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "Whoever slaughtered (his sacrifice) before the 'Id prayer,
should slaughter again." A man stood up and said, "This is the day on which
one has desire for meat," and he mentioned something about his neighbors.
It seemed that the Prophet I believed him. Then the same man added, "
have a young she-goat which is dearer to me than the meat of two sheep."
The Prophet permitted him to slaughter it as a sacrifice. I do not know
whether that permission was valid only for him or for others as well.

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 75:
Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib:
The Prophet delivered the Khutba after offering the prayer on the Day of
Nahr and said, "Whoever offers the prayer like us and slaughters like us then
his Nusuk (sacrifice) will be accepted by Allah. And whoever slaughters his
sacrifice before the 'Id prayer then he has not done the sacrifice." Abi Burda
bin Niyar, the uncle of Al-Bara' said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have slaughtered
my sheep before the 'Id prayer and I thought today as a day of eating and
drinking (not alcoholic drinks), and I liked that my sheep should be the first
to be slaughtered in my house. So slaughtered my sheep and took my food
before coming for the prayer." The Prophet said, "The sheep which you
have slaughtered is just mutton (not a Nusuk)." He (Abu Burda) said, "O
Allah's Apostle! I have a young she-goat which is dearer to me than two
sheep. Will that be sufficient as a Nusuk on my behalf? "The Prophet
(p.b.u.h) said, "Yes, it will be sufficient for you but it will not be sufficient (as
a Nusuk) for anyone else after you."

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 76:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
The Prophet used to proceed to the Musalla on the days of Id-ul-Fitr and Idul-Adha; the first thing to begin with was the prayer and after that he would
stand in front of the people and the people would keep sitting in their rows.
Then he would preach to them, advise them and give them orders, (i.e.
Khutba). And after that if he wished to send an army for an expedition, he
would do so; or if he wanted to give and order, he would do so, and then
depart. The people followed this tradition till I went out with Marwan, the
Governor of Medina, for the prayer of Id-ul-Adha or Id-ul-Fitr.
When we reached the Musalla, there was a pulpit made by Kathir bin As-Salt.
Marwan wanted to get up on that pulpit before the prayer. I got hold of his
clothes but he pulled them and ascended the pulpit and delivered the
Khutba before the prayer. I said to him, "By Allah, you have changed (the
Prophet's tradition)." He replied, "O Abu Sa'id! Gone is that which you
know." I said, "By Allah! What I know is better than what I do not know."
Marwan said, "People do not sit to listen to our Khutba after the prayer, so I
delivered the Khutba before the prayer."

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 77:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:
Allah's Apostle used to offer the prayer of 'Id-ul-Adha and 'Id-ul-Fitr and then
deliver the Khutba after the prayer.

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 78:
Narrated Ibn Juraij:
'Ata' said, "Jabir bin 'Abdullah said, 'The Prophet went out on the Day of 'Idul-Fitr and offered the prayer before delivering the Khutba, Ata told me that
during the early days of IbnAz-Zubair, Ibn Abbas had sent a message to him
telling him that the Adhan for the 'Id Prayer was never pronounced (in the
life time of Allah's Apostle) and the Khutba used to be delivered after the
prayer. Ata told me that Ibn Abbas and Jabir bin 'Abdullah, had said, where was no Adhan for the prayer of '7d-ul-Fitr and 'Id-ul-Aqha." 'At a' said,
"I heard Jabir bin 'Abdullah saying, 'The Prophet stood up and started with
the prayer, and after it he delivered the Khutba. When the Prophet of Allah
(p.b.u.h) finished (the Khutba), he went to the women and preached to
them, while he was leaning on Bilal's hand. Bilal was spreading his garment
and the ladies were putting alms in it.' " I said to Ata, "Do you think it
incumbent upon an Imam to go to the women and preach to them after
finishing the prayer and Khutba?" 'Ata' said, "No doubt it is incumbent on
Imams to do so, and why should they not do so?"
Volume 2, Book 15, Number 79:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
I offered the 'Id prayer with Allah's Apostle, Abu Bakr, Umar and 'Uthman
and all of them offered the prayer before delivering the Khutba.

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 80:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
Allah's Apostle, Abu Bakr and Umar! used to offer the two 'Id prayers before
delivering the Khutba.

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 81:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet offered a two Rakat prayer on the Day of Id ul Fitr and he did
not pray before or after it. Then he went towards women along with Bilal
and ordered them to pay alms and so they started giving their earrings and
necklaces (in charity).

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 82:
Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib:
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "The first thing that we should do on this day of
ours is to pray and then return to slaughter the sacrifice. So anyone who
does so, he acted according to our Sunna (tradition), and whoever
slaughtered the sacrifice before the prayer, it was just meat which he
presented to his family and would not be considered as Nusuk." A person
from the Ansar named Abu Burda bin Niyyar said, "O Allah's Apostle! I
slaughtered the Nusuk (before the prayer) but I have a young she-goat
which is better than an older sheep." The Prophet I said, "Sacrifice it in lie
of the first, but it will be not sufficient (as a sacrifice) for anybody else after
you."

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 83:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
I was with Ibn Umar when a spear head pierced the sole of his foot and his
foot stuck to the paddle of the saddle and I got down and pulled his foot
out, and that happened in Mina. Al-Hajjaj got the news and came to enquire
about his health and said, "Alas! If we could only know the man who
wounded you!" Ibn Umar said, "You are the one who wounded me." AlHajjaj said, "How is that?" Ibn Umar said, "You have allowed the arms to be
carried on a day on which nobody used to carry them and you allowed arms
to be carried in the Haram even though it was not allowed before."

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 84:
Narrated Said bin 'Amr bin Said bin Al-'Aas:
Al-Hajjaj went to Ibn Umar while I was present there. Al-Hajjaj asked Ibn
Umar, "How are you?" Ibn Umar replied, "I am all right," Al-Hajjaj asked,
"Who wounded you?" Ibn Umar replied, "The person who allowed arms to
be carried on the day on which it was forbidden to carry them (he meant AlHajjaj)"

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 85:
Narrated Al-Bara':
The Prophet delivered the Khutba on the day of Nahr ('Id-ul-Adha) and said,
"The first thing we should do on this day of ours is to pray and then return
and slaughter (our sacrifices). So anyone who does so he acted according to
our Sunna; and whoever slaughtered before the prayer then it was just meat
that he offered to his family and would not be considered as a sacrifice in
any way. My uncle Abu Burda bin Niyyar got up and said, "O, Allah's Apostle!
I slaughtered the sacrifice before the prayer but I have a young she-goat
which is better than an older sheep." The Prophet said, "Slaughter it in lieu
of the first and such a goat will not be considered as a sacrifice for anybody
else after you."

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 86:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet said, "No good deeds done on other days are superior to those
done on these (first ten days of Dhul Hijja)." Then some companions of the
Prophet said, "Not even Jihad?" He replied, "Not even Jihad, except that of
a man who does it by putting himself and his property in danger (for Allah's
sake) and does not return with any of those things."

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 87:
Narrated Muhammad bin Abi Bakr Al-Thaqafi:
While we were going from Mina to 'Arafat, I asked Anas bin Malik, about
Talbiya, "How did you use to say Talbiya in the company of the Prophet?"
Anas said: "People used to say Talbiya and their saying was not objected to
and they used to say Takbir and that was not objected to either. "

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 88:
Narrated Um 'Atiya:
We used to be ordered to come out on the Day of 'Id and even bring out the
virgin girls from their houses and menstruating women so that they might
stand behind the men and say Takbir along with them and invoke Allah
along with them and hope for the blessings of that day and for purification
from sins.
Volume 2, Book 15, Number 89:
Narrated Ibn Umar: On the day of 'Id-ul-Fitr and 'Id-ul-Adha a spear used to
be planted in front of the Prophet I (as a Sutra for the prayer) and then he
would pray.

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 90:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
The Prophet used to proceed to the Musalla and an 'Anaza used to be
carried before him and planted in the Musalla in front of him and he would
pray facing it (as a Sutra).

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 91:
Narrated Muhammad:
Um 'Atiyya said: "Our Prophet ordered us to come out (on 'Id day) with the
mature girls and the virgins staying in seclusion." Hafsa narrated the above
mentioned Hadith and added, "The mature girls or virgins staying in
seclusion but the menstruating women had to keep away from the
Musalla."

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 92:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
I (in my boyhood) went out with the Prophet on the day of 'Id ul Fitr or Id-ulAdha. The Prophet prayed and then delivered the Khutba and then went
towards the women, preached and advised them and ordered them to give
alms.

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 93:
Narrated Al-Bara':
The Prophet went towards Al-Baqi (the grave-yard at Medina) on the day of
Id-ul-Adha and offered a two-Rakat prayer (of 'Id-ul-Adha) and then faced us
and said, "On this day of ours, our first act of worship is the offering of
prayer and then we will return and slaughter the sacrifice, and whoever
does this concords with our Sunna; and whoever slaughtered his sacrifice
before that (i.e. before the prayer) then that was a thing which he prepared
earlier for his family and it would not be considered as a Nusuk (sacrifice.)" A
man stood up and said, "O, Allah's Apostle! I slaughtered (the animal before
the prayer) but I have a young she-goat which is better than an older
sheep." The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said to him, "Slaughter it. But a similar
sacrifice will not be sufficient for anybody else after you."

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 94:
Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin 'Abis:
Ibn Abbas was asked whether he had joined the Prophet in the 'Id prayer.
He said, "Yes. And I could not have joined him had I not been young. (The
Prophet came out) till he reached the mark which was near the house of
Kathir bin As-Salt, offered the prayer, delivered the Khutba and then went
towards the women. Bilal was accompanying him. He preached to them and
advised them and ordered them to give alms. I saw the women putting their
ornaments with their outstretched hands into Bilal's garment. Then the
Prophet along with Bilal returned home.

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 95:
Narrated Ibn Juraij:
'Ata' told me that he had heard Jabir bin 'Abdullah saying, "The Prophet
stood up to offer the prayer of the 'Id ul Fitr. He first offered the prayer and
then delivered the Khutba. After finishing it he got down (from the pulpit)
and went towards the women and advised them while he was leaning on
Bilal's hand. Bilal was spreading out his garment where the women were
putting their alms." I asked 'Ata' whether it was the Zakat of 'Id ul Fitr. He
said, "No, it was just alms given at that time. Some lady put her finger ring
and the others would do the same." I said, (to 'Ata'), "Do you think that it is
incumbent upon the Imam to give advice to the women (on 'Id day)?" He
said, "No doubt, it is incumbent upon the Imams to do so and why should
they not do so?" Al-Hasan bin Muslim told me that Ibn Abbas had said, "I join
the Prophet, Abu Bakr, Umar and 'Uthman in the 'Id ul Fitr prayers. They
used to offer the prayer before the Khutba and then they used to deliver the
Khutba afterwards. Once the Prophet I came out (for the 'Id prayer) as if I
were just observing him waving to the people to sit down. He, then
accompanied by Bilal, came crossing the rows till he reached the women. He
recited the following verse: 'O Prophet! When the believing women come to
you to take the oath of fealty to you . . . (to the end of the verse) (60.12).'
After finishing the recitation he said, "O ladies! Are you fulfilling your
covenant?" None except one woman said, "Yes." Hasan did not know who
was that woman. The Prophet said, "Then give alms." Bilal spread his
garment and said, "Keep on giving alms. Let my father and mother sacrifice
their lives for you (ladies)." So the ladies kept on putting their Fatkhs (big
rings) and other kinds of rings in Bilal's garment." Abdur-Razaq said, "
'Fatkhs' is a big ring which used to be worn in the (Pre-lslamic) period of
ignorance.

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 96:
Narrated Aiyub:
Hafsa bint Sirin said, "On Id we used to forbid our girls to go out for 'Id
prayer. A lady came and stayed at the palace of Bani Khalaf and I went to
her. She said, 'The husband of my sister took part in twelve holy battles
along with the Prophet and my sister was with her husband in six of them.
My sister said that they used to nurse the sick and treat the wounded. Once
she asked, 'O Allah's Apostle! If a woman has no veil, is there any harm if she
does not come out (on 'Id day)?' The Prophet said, 'Her companion should
let her share her veil with her, and the women should participate in the good
deeds and in the religious gatherings of the believers.' " Hafsa added,
"When Um-'Atiya came, I went to her and asked her, 'Did you hear anything
about so-and-so?' Um-'Atlya said, 'Yes, let my father be sacrificed for the
Prophet (p.b.u.h). (And whenever she mentioned the name of the Prophet
she always used to say, 'Let my father be' sacrificed for him). He said, 'Virgin
mature girls staying often screened (or said, 'Mature girls and virgins staying
often screened--Aiyub is not sure as which was right) and menstruating
women should come out (on the 'Id day). But the menstruating women
should keep away from the Musalla. And all the women should participate in
the good deeds and in the religious gatherings of the believers'." Hafsa said,
"On that I said to Um-'Atiya, 'Also those who are menstruating?' " Um-'Atiya
replied, "Yes. Do they not present themselves at 'Arafat and elsewhere?".

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 97:
Narrated Um-'Atiya:
We were ordered to go out (for 'Id) and also to take along with us the
menstruating women, mature girls and virgins staying in seclusion. (Ibn 'Aun
said, "Or mature virgins staying in seclusion)." The menstruating women
could present themselves at the religious gathering and invocation of
Muslims but should keep away from their Musalla.

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 98:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to Nahr or slaughter sacrifices at the Musalla (on
'Id-ul-Adha).

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 99:
Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib:
On the day of Nahr Allah's Apostle delivered the Khutba after the 'Id prayer
and said, "Anyone who prayed like us and slaughtered the sacrifice like we
did then he acted according to our (Nusuk) tradition of sacrificing, and
whoever slaughtered the sacrifice before the prayer, then that was just
mutton (i.e. not sacrifice)." Abu Burda bin Naiyar stood up and said, "O
Allah's Apostle! By Allah, I slaughtered my sacrifice before I offered the (Id)
prayer and thought that today was the day of eating and drinking (nonalcoholic drinks) and so I made haste (in slaughtering) and ate and also fed
my family and neighbors." Allah's Apostle said, "That was just mutton (not a
sacrifice)." Then Abu Burda said, "I have a young she-goat and no doubt, it is
better than two sheep. Will that be sufficient as a sacrifice for me?" The
Prophet replied, "Yes. But it will not be sufficient for anyone else (as a
sacrifice), after you."

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 100:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle .~ offered the prayer on the day of Nahr and then delivered
the Khutba and ordered that whoever had slaughtered his sacrifice before
the prayer should repeat it, that is, should slaughter another sacrifice. Then
a person from the Ansar stood up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! because of
my neighbors (he described them as being very needy or poor) I slaughtered
before the prayer. I have a young she-goat which, in my opinion, is better
than two sheep." The Prophet gave him the permission for slaughtering it as
a sacrifice.

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 101:
Narrated Jundab:
On the day of Nahr the Prophet offered the prayer and delivered the Khutba
and then slaughtered the sacrifice and said, "Anybody who slaughtered (his
sacrifice) before the prayer should slaughter another animal in lieu of it, and
the one who has not yet slaughtered should slaughter the sacrifice
mentioning Allah's name on it."
Volume 2, Book 15, Number 102:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
On the Day of 'Id the Prophet used to return (after offering the 'Id prayer)
through a way different from that by which he went.

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 103:
Narrated 'Urwa on the authority of 'Aisha:
On the days of Mina, (11th, 12th, and 13th of Dhul-Hijjah) Abu Bakr came to
her while two young girls were beating the tambourine and the Prophet was
lying covered with his clothes. Abu Bakr scolded them and the Prophet
uncovered his face and said to Abu Bakr, "Leave them, for these days are
the days of 'Id and the days of Mina." 'Aisha further said, "Once the Prophet
was screening me and I was watching the display of black slaves in the
Mosque and ('Umar) scolded them. The Prophet said, 'Leave them. O Bani
Arfida! (carry on), you are safe (protected)'."

Volume 2, Book 15, Number 104:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet went out and offered a two Rakat prayer on the Day of 'Id ul
Fitr and did not offer any other prayer before or after it and at that time Bilal
was accompanying him.
BOOK 16. WITR PRAYER (105-118)
Volume 2, Book 16, Number 105:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
Once a person asked Allah's Apostle about the night prayer. Allah's Apostle
replied, "The night prayer is offered as two Rakat followed by two Rakat
and so on and if anyone is afraid of the approaching dawn (Fajr prayer) he
should pray one Raka and this will be a Witr for all the Rakat which he has
prayed before." Nafi' told that 'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to say Taslim
between (the first) two Rakat and (the third) odd one in the Witr prayer,
when he wanted to attend to a certain matter (during that interval between
the Rakat).

Volume 2, Book 16, Number 106:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Once I passed the night in the house of Maimuna (his aunt). I slept across
the bed while Allah's Apostle and his wife slept length-wise. The Prophet
slept till midnight or nearly so and woke up rubbing his face and recited ten
verses from Surat "Aal-Imran." Allah's Apostle went towards a leather skin
and performed ablution in the most perfect way and then stood for the
prayer. I did the same and stood beside him. The Prophet put his right hand
on my head, twisted my ear and then prayed two Rakat five times and then
ended his prayer with Witr. He laid down till the Muadh-dhin came then he
stood up and offered two Rakat (Sunna of Fajr prayer) and then went out
and offered the Fajr prayer.
(See Hadith No. 183, Vol. 1)

Volume 2, Book 16, Number 107:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar :
The Prophet said, "Night prayer is offered as two Rakat followed by two
Rakat and so on, and if you want to finish it, pray only one Raka which will
be Witr for all the previous Rakat." Al-Qasim said, "Since we attained the age
of puberty we have seen some people offering a three-Rakat prayer as Witr
and all that is permissible. I hope there will be no harm in it."

Volume 2, Book 16, Number 108:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle used to pray eleven Rakat at night and that was his night
prayer and each of his prostrations lasted for a period enough for one of you
to recite fifty verses before Allah's Apostle raised his head. He also used to
pray two Rakat (Sunna) before the (compulsory) Fajr prayer and then lie
down on his right side till the Muadh-dhin came to him for the prayer.

Volume 2, Book 16, Number 109:
Narrated Anas bin Sirin:
I asked Ibn 'Umar, "What is your opinion about the two Rakat before the
Fajr (compulsory) prayer, as to prolonging the recitation in them?" He said,
"The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to pray at night two Rakat followed by two and
so on, and end the prayer by one Raka Witr. He used to offer two Rakat
before the Fajr prayer immediately after the Adhan." (Hammad, the subnarrator said, "That meant (that he prayed) quickly.)"

Volume 2, Book 16, Number 110:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle offered Witr prayer at different nights at various hours
extending (from the 'Isha' prayer) up to the last hour of the night.
Volume 2, Book 16, Number 111:
Narrated 'Aisha :
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to offer his night prayer while I was sleeping
across in his bed. Whenever he intended to offer the Witr prayer, he used to
wake me up and I would offer the Witr prayer too.

Volume 2, Book 16, Number 112:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Make s your last prayer at night."

Volume 2, Book 16, Number 113:
Narrated Said bin Yasar:
I was going to Mecca in the company of 'Abdullah bin 'Umar and when I
apprehended the approaching dawn, I dismounted and offered the Witr
prayer and then joined him. 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "Where have you
been?" I replied, "I apprehended the approaching dawn so I dismounted and
prayed the Witr prayer." 'Abdullah said, "Isn't it sufficient for you to follow
the good example of Allah's Apostle?" I replied, "Yes, by Allah." He said,
"Allah's Apostle used to pray Witr on the back of the camel (while on a
journey)."

Volume 2, Book 16, Number 114:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet used to offer (Nawafil) prayers on his Rahila (mount) facing its
direction by signals, but not the compulsory prayer. He also used to pray
Witr on his (mount) Rahila.
Volume 2, Book 16, Number 115:
Narrated Muhammad bin Sirin:
Anas was asked, "Did the Prophet recite Qunut in the Fajr prayer?" Anas
replied in the affirmative. He was further asked, "Did he recite Qunut before
bowing?" Anas replied, "He recited Qunut after bowing for some time (for
one month)."

Volume 2, Book 16, Number 116:
Narrated 'Asim:
I asked Anas bin Malik about the Qunut. Anas replied, "Definitely it was
(recited)". I asked, "Before bowing or after it?" Anas replied, "Before
bowing." I added, "So and so has told me that you had informed him that it
had been after bowing." Anas said, "He told an untruth (i.e. "was mistaken,"
according to the Hijazi dialect). Allah's Apostle recited Qunut after bowing
for a period of one month." Anas added, "The Prophet sent about seventy
men (who knew the Quran by heart) towards the pagans (of Najd) who
were less than they in number and there was a peace treaty between them
and Allah's Apostles (but the Pagans broke the treaty and killed the seventy
men). So Allah's Apostle recited Qunut for a period of one month asking
Allah to punish them."

Volume 2, Book 16, Number 117:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet recited Qunut for one month (in the Fajr prayer) asking Allah to
punish the tribes of Ral and Dhakwan.

Volume 2, Book 16, Number 118:
Narrated Anas:
The Qunut used to be recited in the Maghrib and the Fajr prayers.
BOOK 17. INVOKING ALLAH FOR RAIN (ISTISQAA) (119-149)
Volume 2, Book 17, Number 119:
Narrated 'Abbas bin Tamim's uncle:
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) went out to offer the Istisqa' prayer and turned (and
put on) his cloak inside out.

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 120:
Narrated Abu Huraira;
Whenever the Prophet (p.b.u.h) lifted his head from the bowing in the last
Raka he used to say: "O Allah! Save 'Aiyash bin Abi Rabi'a. O Allah! Save
Salama bin Hisham. O Allah! Save Walid bin Walid. O Allah! Save the weak
faithful believers. O Allah! Be hard on the tribes of Mudar and send (famine)
years on them like the famine years of (Prophet) Joseph ." The Prophet
further said, "Allah forgive the tribes of Ghifar and save the tribes of Aslam."
Abu Az-Zinad (a sub-narrator) said, "The Qunut used to be recited by the
Prophet in the Fajr prayer."

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 121:
Narrated Masruq:
We were with 'Abdullah and he said, "When the Prophet saw the refusal of
the people to accept Islam he said, "O Allah! Send (famine) years on them
for (seven years) like the seven years (of famine during the time) of
(Prophet) Joseph." So famine overtook them for one year and destroyed
every kind of life to such an extent that the people started eating hides,
carcasses and rotten dead animals. Whenever one of them looked towards
the sky, he would (imagine himself to) see smoke because of hunger. So
Abu Sufyan went to the Prophet and said, "O Muhammad! You order people
to obey Allah and to keep good relations with kith and kin. No doubt the
people of your tribe are dying, so please pray to Allah for them." So Allah
revealed: "Then watch you For the day that The sky will bring forth a kind Of
smoke Plainly visible ... Verily! You will return (to disbelief) On the day when
We shall seize You with a mighty grasp. (44.10-16) Ibn Masud added, "AlBatsha (i.e. grasp) happened in the battle of Badr and no doubt smoke, AlBatsha, Al-Lizam, and the verse of Surat Ar-Rum have all passed .

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 122:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Dinar:
My father said, "I heard Ibn 'Umar reciting the poetic verses of Abu Talib:
And a white (person) (i.e. the Prophet) who is requested to pray for rain and
who takes care of the orphans and is the guardian of widows." Salim's
father (Ibn 'Umar) said, "The following poetic verse occurred to my mind
while I was looking at the face of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) while he was praying
for rain. He did not get down till the rain water flowed profusely from every
roof-g utter: And a white (person) who is requested to pray for rain and who
takes care of the orphans and is the guardian of widows . . . And these were
the words of Abu Talib."

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 123:
Narrated Anas:
Whenever drought threatened them, 'Umar bin Al-Khattab, used to ask AlAbbas bin 'Abdul Muttalib to invoke Allah for rain. He used to say, "O Allah!
We used to ask our Prophet to invoke You for rain, and You would bless us
with rain, and now we ask his uncle to invoke You for rain. O Allah ! Bless us
with rain."(1) And so it would rain.

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 124:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid:
The Prophet turned his cloak inside out on Istisqa.

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 125:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid
The Prophet went towards the Musalla and invoked Allah for rain. He faced
the Qibla and wore his cloak inside out, and offered two Rakat.

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 126:
Narrated Sharik bin 'Abdullah bin Abi Namir:
I heard Anas bin Malik saying, "On a Friday a person entered the main
Mosque through the gate facing the pulpit while Allah's Apostle was
delivering the Khutba. The man stood in front of Allah's Apostle and said, 'O
Allah's Apostle! The livestock are dying and the roads are cut off; so please
pray to Allah for rain.' " Anas added, "Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) raised both
his hands and said, 'O Allah! Bless us with rain! O Allah! Bless us with rain! O
Allah! Bless us with rain!' " Anas added, "By Allah, we could not see any trace
of cloud in the sky and there was no building or a house between us and
(the mountains of) Sila." Anas added, "A heavy cloud like a shield appeared
from behind it (i.e. Sila' Mountain). When it came in the middle of the sky, it
spread and then rained." Anas further said, "By Allah! We could not see the
sun for a week. Next Friday a person entered through the same gate and at
that time Allah's Apostle was delivering the Friday's Khutba. The man stood
in front of him and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! The livestock are dying and the
roads are cut off, please pray to Allah to with-hold rain.' " Anas added,
"Allah's Apostle I raised both his hands and said, 'O Allah! Round about us
and not on us. O Allah! On the plateaus, on the mountains, on the hills, in the
valleys and on the places where trees grow.' So the rain stopped and we
came out walking in the sun." Sharik asked Anas whether it was the same
person who had asked for the rain (the last Friday). Anas replied that he did
not know.
Volume 2, Book 17, Number 127:
Narrated Sharik:
Anas bin Malik said, "A person entered the Mosque on a Friday through the
gate facing the Daril-Qada' and Allah's Apostle was standing delivering the
Khutba (sermon). The man stood in front of Allah's Apostle and said, 'O
Allah's Apostle, livestock are dying and the roads are cut off; please pray to
Allah for rain.' So Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) raised both his hands and said, 'O
Allah! Bless us with rain. O Allah! Bless us with rain. O Allah! Bless us with
rain!" Anas added, "By Allah, there were no clouds in the sky and there was
no house or building between us and the mountain of Silas'. Then a big
cloud like a shield appeared from behind it (i.e. Silas Mountain) and when it
came in the middle of the sky, it spread and then rained. By Allah! We could
not see the sun for a week. The next Friday, a person entered through the
same gate and Allah's Apostle was delivering the Friday Khutba and the man
stood in front of him and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! The livestock are dying and
the roads are cut off; Please pray to Allah to withhold rain.' " Anas added,
"Allah's Apostle raised both his hands and said, 'O Allah! Round about us and
not on us. O Allah!' On the plateaus, on the mountains, on the hills, in the
valleys and on the places where trees grow.' " Anas added, "The rain
stopped and we came out, walking in the sun." Sharik asked Anas whether it
was the same person who had asked for rain the previous Friday. Anas
replied that he did not know.

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 128:
Narrated Qatada:
Anas I said, "While Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) was delivering the Friday Khutba
(sermon) a man came and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Rain is scarce; please ask
Allah to bless us with rain.' So he invoked Allah for it, and it rained so much
that we could hardly reach our homes and it continued raining till the next
Friday." Anas further said, "Then the same or some other person stood up
and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah to withhold the rain.' On that,
Allah's Apostle I said, 'O Allah! Round about us and not on us.' " Anas added,
"I saw the clouds dispersing right and left and it continued to rain but not
over Medina."

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 129:
Narrated Anas:
A man came to the Prophet (p.b.u.h) and said, "Livestock are destroyed and
the roads are cut off." So Allah's Apostle invoked Allah for rain and it rained
from that Friday till the next Friday. The same person came again and said,
"Houses have collapsed, roads are cut off, and the livestock are destroyed.
Please pray to Allah to withhold the rain." Allah's Apostle (stood up and)
said, "O Allah! (Let it rain) on the plateaus, on the hills, in the valleys and
over the places where trees grow." So the clouds cleared away from Medina
as clothes are taken off .

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 130:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
A man came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Livestock are
destroyed and the roads are cut off. So please invoke Allah." So Allah's
Apostle prayed and it rained from that Friday to the next Friday. Then he
came to Allah's Apostle I and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Houses have
collapsed, roads are cut off and the livestock are destroyed." So Allah's
Apostle (p.b.u.h) prayed, "O Allah! (Let it rain) on the tops of mountains, on
the plateaus, in the valleys and over the places where trees grow." So the
clouds cleared away from Medina as clothes are taken off.

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 131:
Narrated Anas bin Malik
I p man complained to the Prophet about the destruction of livestock and
property and the hunger of the offspring. So he invoked (Allah for rain. The
narrator (Anas) did not mention that the Prophet had worn his cloak inside
out or faced the Qibla.

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 132:
Narrated Anas bin Malik
A man came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Livestock are
destroyed and the roads are cut off; so please invoke Allah." So Allah's
Apostle prayed for rain and it rained from that Friday till the next Friday.
Then a man came to the Prophet (p.b.u.h) and said, "O Allah's Apostle! The
houses have collapsed, roads are cut off and the livestock are destroyed."
So Allah's Apostle said, "O Allah ! (Let it rain) on the tops of the mountains,
on the plateaus, in the valleys and over the places where trees grow." So the
clouds cleared away from Medina as clothes are taken off.

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 133:
Narrated Masruq:
One day I went to Ibn Masud who said, "When Quraish delayed in embracing
Islam, the Prophet I invoked Allah to curse them, so they were afflicted with
a (famine) year because of which many of them died and they ate the
carcasses and Abu Sufyan came to the Prophet and said, 'O Muhammad!
You came to order people to keep good relation with kith and kin and your
nation is being destroyed, so invoke Allah I ? So the Prophet I recited the
Holy verses of Sirat-Ad-Dukhan: 'Then watch you For the day that The sky
will Bring forth a kind Of smoke Plainly visible.' (44.10) When the famine was
taken off, the people renegade once again as nonbelievers. The statement
of Allah, (in Sura "Ad-Dukhan"-44) refers to that: 'On the day when We shall
seize You with a mighty grasp.' (44.16) And that was what happened on the
day of the battle of Badr." Asbath added on the authority of Mansur,
"Allah's Apostle prayed for them and it rained heavily for seven days. So the
people complained of the excessive rain. The Prophet said, 'O Allah! (Let it
rain) around us and not on us.' So the clouds dispersed over his head and it
rained over the surroundings."

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 134:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle I was delivering the Khutba (sermon) on a Friday when the
people stood up, shouted and said, "O Allah's Apostle! There is no rain
(drought), the trees have dried and the livestock are destroyed; Please pray
to Allah for rain." So Allah's Apostle said twice, "O Allah! Bless us with rain."
By Allah, there was no trace of cloud in the sky and suddenly the sky became
overcast with clouds and it started raining. The Prophet came down the
pulpit and offered the prayer. When he came back from the prayer (to his
house) it was raining and it rained continuously till the next Friday. When the
Prophet started delivering the Friday Khutba (sermon), the people started
shouting and said to him, "The houses have collapsed and the roads are cut
off; so please pray to Allah to withhold the rain." So the Prophet smiled and
said, "O Allah! Round about us and not on us." So the sky became clear over
Medina but it kept on raining over the outskirts (of Medina) and not a single
drop of rain fell over Median. I looked towards the sky which was as bright
and clear as a crown.

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 135:
Narrated Abbas bin Tamim
that his uncle (who was one of the companions of the Prophet) had told
him, "The Prophet went out with the people to invoke Allah for rain for
them. He stood up and invoked Allah for rain, then faced the Qibla and
turned his cloak (inside out) and it rained."

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 136:
Narrated Abbas bin Tamim
from his uncle who said, "The Prophet went out to invoke Allah for rain. He
faced the Qibla invoking Allah. He turned over his cloak (inside out) and then
offered two Rakat and recited the Quran aloud in them."

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 137:
Narrated Abbas bin Tamim from his uncle,
"I saw the Prophet on the day when he went out to offer the Istisqa' prayer.
He turned his back towards the people and faced the Qibla and asked Allah
for rain. Then he turned his cloak inside out and led us in a two Rakat prayer
and recited the Qur'an aloud in them."

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 138:
Narrated Abbas bin Tamlm from his uncle who said,
"The Prophet invoked Allah for rain and offered a two Rakat prayer and he
put his cloak inside out."

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 139:
Narrated Abbas bin Tamim from his uncle who said,
"The Prophet went out to the Musalla to offer the Istisqa' prayer, faced the
Qibla and offered a two-Rakat prayer and turned his cloak inside out."
Narrated Abu Bakr, "The Prophet put the right side of his cloak on his left
side."

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 140:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid Al-Ansari:
The Prophet went out towards the Musalla in order to offer the Istisqa'
prayer and when he intended to invoke (Allah) or started invoking, he faced
the Qibla and turned his cloak inside out.

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 141:
Narrated Anas bin Malik
The Prophet never raised his hands for any invocation except for that of
Istisqa' and he used to raise them so much that the whiteness of his armpits
became visible. (Note: It may be that Anas did not see the Prophet raising
his hands, but it is narrated that the Prophet used to raise his hands for
invocations other than Istisqa. See Hadith No. 807 & 808 and also see Hadith
No. 612, Vol. 5).

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 142:
Narrated Aisha:
Whenever Allah's Apostle saw the rain, he used to say, "O Allah! Let it be a
strong fruitful rain."

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 143:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
In the life-time of Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) the people were afflicted with a
(famine) year. While the Prophet was delivering the Khutba (sermon) on the
pulpit on a Friday, a Bedouin stood up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! The
livestock are dying and the families (offspring) are hungry: please pray to
Allah to bless us with rain." Allah's Apostle raised both his hands towards
the sky and at that time there was not a trace of cloud in they sky. Then the
clouds started gathering like mountains. Before he got down from the pulpit
I saw rain-water trickling down his beard. It rained that day, the next day,
the third day, the fourth day and till the next Friday, when the same Bedouin
or some other person stood up (during the Friday Khutba) and said, "O
Allah's Apostle! The houses have collapsed and the livestock are drowned.
Please invoke Allah for us." So Allah's Apostle raised both his hands and
said, "O Allah! Around us and not on us." Whichever side the Prophet
directed his hand, the clouds dispersed from there till a hole (in the clouds)
was formed over Medina. The valley of Qanat remained flowing (with water)
for one month and none, came from outside who didn't talk about the
abundant rain.

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 144:
Narrated Anas:
Whenever a strong wind blew, anxiety appeared on the face of the Prophet
(fearing that wind might be a sign of Allah's wrath).

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 145:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet said, "I was granted victory with As-Saba and the nation of 'Ad
was destroyed by Ad-Dabur (westerly wind) .

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 146:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The Hour (Last Day) will not be established until
(religious) knowledge will be taken away (by the death of religious learned
men), earthquakes will be very frequent, time will pass quickly, afflictions
will appear, murders will increase and money will overflow amongst you."
(See Hadith No. 85 Vol 1).

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 147:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
(The Prophet) said, "O Allah! Bless our Sham and our Yemen." People said,
"Our Najd as well." The Prophet again said, "O Allah! Bless our Sham and
Yemen." They said again, "Our Najd as well." On that the Prophet said,
"There will appear earthquakes and afflictions, and from there will come out
the side of the head of Satan."

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 148:
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani:
Allah's Apostle led the morning prayer in Al-Hudaibiya and it had rained the
previous night. When the Prophet (p.b.u.h) had finished the prayer he faced
the people and said, "Do you know what your Lord has said?" They replied,
"Allah and His Apostle know better." (The Prophet said), "Allah says, 'In this
morning some of My worshipers remained as true believers and some
became non-believers; he who said that it had rained with the blessing and
mercy of Allah is the one who believes in Me and does not believe in star,
but he who said it had rained because of such and such (star) is a disbeliever
in Me and is a believer in star.' "

Volume 2, Book 17, Number 149:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "Keys of the unseen knowledge are five which
nobody knows but Allah . . . nobody knows what will happen tomorrow;
nobody knows what is in the womb; nobody knows what he will gain
tomorrow; nobody knows at what place he will die; and nobody knows
when it will rain."


BOOK 18. ECLIPSES (150-172)
Volume 2, Book 18, Number 150:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
We were with Allah's Apostle when the sun eclipsed. Allah's Apostle stood
up dragging his cloak till he entered the Mosque. He led us in a two-Rakat
prayer till the sun (eclipse) had cleared. Then the Prophet (p.b.u.h) said,
"The sun and the moon do not eclipse because of someone's death. So
whenever you see these eclipses pray and invoke (Allah) till the eclipse is
over."

Volume 2, Book 18, Number 151:
Narrated Abu Masud:
The Prophet said, "The sun and the moon do not eclipse because of the
death of someone from the people but they are two signs amongst the
signs of Allah. When you see them stand up and pray."

Volume 2, Book 18, Number 152:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "The sun and the moon do not eclipse because of the
death or life (i.e. birth) of someone but they are two signs amongst the
signs of Allah. When you see them offer the prayer."

Volume 2, Book 18, Number 153:
Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba:
"The sun eclipsed in the life-time of Allah's Apostle on the day when (his
son) Ibrahim died. So the people said that the sun had eclipsed because of
the death of Ibrahim. Allah's Apostle said, "The sun and the moon do not
eclipse because of the death or life (i.e. birth) of some-one. When you see
the eclipse pray and invoke Allah."

Volume 2, Book 18, Number 154:
Narrated 'Aisha :
In the life-time of Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) the sun eclipsed, so he led the
people in prayer, and stood up and performed a long Qiyam, then bowed for
a long while. He stood up again and performed a long Qiyam but this time
the period of standing was shorter than the first. He bowed again for a long
time but shorter than the first one, then he prostrated and prolonged the
prostration. He did the same in the second Raka as he did in the first and
then finished the prayer; by then the sun (eclipse) had cleared. He delivered
the Khutba (sermon) and after praising and glorifying Allah he said, "The sun
and the moon are two signs against the signs of Allah; they do not eclipse on
the death or life of anyone. So when you see the eclipse, remember Allah
and say Takbir, pray and give Sadaqa." The Prophet then said, "O followers
of Muhammad! By Allah! There is none who has more ghaira (self-respect)
than Allah as He has forbidden that His slaves, male or female commit
adultery (illegal sexual intercourse). O followers of Muhammad! By Allah! If
you knew that which I know you would laugh little and weep much.

Volume 2, Book 18, Number 155:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr :
"When the sun eclipsed in the life-time of Allah's Apostle an announcement
was made that a prayer was to be offered in congregation."

Volume 2, Book 18, Number 156:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) In the lifetime of the Prophet the sun
eclipsed and he went to the Mosque and the people aligned behind him. He
said the Takbir (starting the prayer) and prolonged the recitation (from the
Quran) and then said Takbir and performed a prolonged bowing; then he
(lifted his head and) said, "Sami allahu liman hamidah" (Allah heard him who
sent his praises to Him). He then did not prostrate but stood up and recited
a prolonged recitation which was shorter than the first recitation. He again
said Takbir and then bowed a prolonged bowing but shorter than the first
one and then said, "Sami 'a-l-lahu Lyman hamidah Rabbana walak-lhamd,
(Allah heard him who sent his praises to Him. O our Sustainer! All the praises
are for You)" and then prostrated and did the same in the second Raka; thus
he completed four bowing and four prostrations. The sun (eclipse) had
cleared before he finished the prayer. (After the prayer) he stood up,
glorified and praised Allah as He deserved and then said, "The sun and the
moon are two of the signs of Allah. They do not eclipse because of the death
or the life (i.e. birth) of someone. When you see them make haste for the
prayer." Narrated Az-Zuhri: I said to 'Ursa, "When the sun eclipsed at Medina
your brother ('Abdullah bin Az-Zubair) offered only a two-Rakat prayer like
that of the morning (Fajr) prayer." 'Ursa replied, "Yes, for he missed the
Prophet's tradition (concerning this matter)."

Volume 2, Book 18, Number 157:
Narrated Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) On the day when the sun Khasafat (eclipsed)
Allah's Apostle prayed; he stood up and said Takbir and recited a prolonged
recitation, then he performed a prolonged bowing, then he raised his head
and said, "Sami'a-l-lahu Lyman Hamidah," and then remained standing and
recited a prolonged recitation which was shorter than the first. Then he
performed a prolonged bowing which was shorter than the first. Then he
prostrated and prolonged the prostration and he did the same in the second
Raka as in the first and then finished the prayer with Taslim. By that time the
sun (eclipse) had cleared He addressed the people and said, "The sun and
the moon are two of the signs of Allah; they do not eclipse (Yakhsifan)
because of the death or the life (i.e. birth) of someone. So when you see
them make haste for the prayer."

Volume 2, Book 18, Number 158:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
Allah's Apostle said: "The sun and the moon are two signs amongst the signs
of Allah and they do not eclipse because of the death of someone but Allah
frightens His devotees with them."

Volume 2, Book 18, Number 159:
Narrated 'Amra bint 'AbdurRahman:
A Jewess came to ask 'Aisha (the wife of the Prophet) about something. She
said to her, "May Allah give you refuge from the punishment of the grave."
So 'Aisha ' asked Allah's Apostle "Would the people be punished in their
graves?" Allah's Apostle after seeking refuge with Allah from the
punishment of the grave (and thus replied in the affirmative). Then one day,
Allah's Apostle rode to go to some place but the sun eclipsed. He returned in
the forenoon and passed through the rear of the dwellings (of his wives)
and stood for the (eclipse) prayer, and the people stood behind him. He
stood up for a long period and then performed a prolonged bowing which
was shorter than the first bowing. Then he raised his head and prostrated.
Then he stood up (for the second Raka) for a long while but the standing
was shorter than that of the first Raka. Then he performed a prolonged
bowing which was shorter than the first one. Then he raised his head and
prostrated. Then he stood up for a long time but shorter than the first. Then
he performed a prolonged bowing but shorter than the first. Then he raised
his head and prostrated and finished the prayer and (then delivered the
sermon and) said as much as Allah wished. And then he ordered the people
to seek refuge with Allah from the punishment of the grave.
Volume 2, Book 18, Number 160:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr
When the sun eclipsed in the lifetime of Allah's Apostle and an
announcement was made that the prayer was to be held in congregation.
The Prophet performed two bowing in one Raka. Then he stood up and
performed two bowing in one Raka. Then he sat down and finished the
prayer; and by then the (eclipse) had cleared 'Aisha said, "I had never
performed such a long prostration."

Volume 2, Book 18, Number 161:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abbas:
The sun eclipsed in the life-time of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) . Allah's Apostle
offered the eclipse prayer and stood for a long period equal to the period in
which one could recite Surat-al-Baqara. Then he bowed for a long time and
then stood up for a long period which was shorter than that of the first
standing, then bowed again for a long time but for a shorter period than the
first; then he prostrated twice and then stood up for a long period which
was shorter than that of the first standing; then he bowed for a long time
which was shorter than the previous one, and then he raised his head and
stood up for a long period which was shorter than the first standing, then he
bowed for a long time which was shorter than the first bowing, and then
prostrated (twice) and finished the prayer. By then, the sun (eclipse) had
cleared. The Prophet then said, "The sun and the moon are two of the signs
of Allah. They eclipse neither because of the death of somebody nor
because of his life (i.e. birth). So when you see them, remember Allah." The
people say, "O Allah's Apostle! We saw you taking something from your
place and then we saw you retreating." The Prophet replied, "I saw Paradise
and stretched my hands towards a bunch (of its fruits) and had I taken it,
you would have eaten from it as long as the world remains. I also saw the
Hell-fire and I had never seen such a horrible sight. I saw that most of the
inhabitants were women." The people asked, "O Allah's Apostle! Why is it
so?" The Prophet replied, "Because of their ungratefulness." It was asked
whether they are ungrateful to Allah. The Prophet said, "They are ungrateful
to their companions of life (husbands) and ungrateful to good deeds. If you
are benevolent to one of them throughout the life and if she sees anything
(undesirable) in you, she will say, 'I have never had any good from you.' "

Volume 2, Book 18, Number 162:
Narrated Fatima bint Al-Mundhir:
Asma' bint Al Bakr said, "I came to 'Aisha the wife of the Prophet (p.b.u.h)
during the solar eclipse. The people were standing and offering the prayer
and she was also praying too. I asked her, 'What has happened to the
people?' She pointed out with her hand towards the sky and said, 'SubhanAllah'. I said, 'Is there a sign?' She pointed out in the affirmative." Asma'
further said, "I too then stood up for the prayer till I fainted and then poured
water on my head. When Allah's Apostle had finished his prayer, he thanked
and praised Allah and said, 'I have seen at this place of mine what I have
never seen even Paradise and Hell. No doubt, it has been inspired to me that
you will be put to trial in the graves like or nearly like the trial of (Masih) AdDajjal. (I do not know which one of the two Asma' said.) (The angels) will
come to everyone of you and will ask what do you know about this man (i.e.
Muhammad). The believer or a firm believer (I do not know which word
Asma' said) will reply, 'He is Muhammad, Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) who came
to us with clear evidences and guidance, so we accepted his teachings,
believed and followed him.' The angels will then say to him, 'Sleep
peacefully as we knew surely that you were a firm believer.' The hypocrite or
doubtful person (I do not know which word Asma' said) will say, 'I do not
know. I heard the people saying something so I said it (the same).' "

Volume 2, Book 18, Number 163:
Narrated Asma:
No doubt the Prophet ordered people to manumit slaves during the solar
eclipse.
Volume 2, Book 18, Number 164:
Narrated 'Amra bint 'AbdurRahman:
A Jewess came to 'Aisha to ask her about something and then she said,
"May Allah give you refuge from the punishment of the grave." So 'Aisha
asked Allah's Apostle, "Would the people be punished in their graves?"
Allah's Apostle asked Allah's refuge from the punishment of the grave
(indicating an affirmative reply). Then one day Allah's Apostle rode (to leave
for some place) but the sun eclipsed. He returned on the forenoon and
passed through the rear of the dwellings (of his wives) and stood up and
started offering the (eclipse) prayer and the people stood behind him. He
stood for a long period and then performed a long bowing and then stood
straight for a long period which was shorter than that of the first standing,
then he performed a prolonged bowing which was shorter than the first
bowing, then he raised his head and prostrated for a long time and then
stood up (for the second Raka) for a long while, but the standing was
shorter than the standing of the first Raka. Then he performed a prolonged
bowing which was shorter than that of the first one. He then stood up for a
long time but shorter than the first, then again performed a long bowing
which was shorter than the first and then prostrated for a shorter while
than that of the first prostration. Then he finished the prayer and delivered
the sermon and) said what Allah wished; and ordered the people to seek
refuge with Allah from the punishment of the grave.

Volume 2, Book 18, Number 165:
Narrated Abu Masud:
Allah's Apostle said, "The sun and the moon do not eclipse because of
someone's death or life but they are two signs amongst the signs of Allah,
so pray whenever you see them."

Volume 2, Book 18, Number 166:
Narrated 'Aisha:
In the lifetime of the Prophet the sun eclipsed and the Prophet (p.b.u.h)
stood up to offer the prayer with the people and recited a long recitation,
then he performed a prolonged bowing, and then lifted his head and recited
a prolonged recitation which was shorter than the first. Then he performed
a prolonged bowing which was shorter than the first and then lifted his
head and performed two prostrations. He then stood up for the second
Raka and offered it like the first. Then he stood up and said, "The sun and
the moon do not eclipse because of someone's life or death but they are
two signs amongst the signs of Allah which He shows to His worshipers. So
whenever you see them, make haste for the prayer."

Volume 2, Book 18, Number 167:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The sun eclipsed and the Prophet got up, being afraid that it might be the
Hour (i.e. Day of Judgment). He went to the Mosque and offered the prayer
with the longest Qiyam, bowing and prostration that I had ever seen him
doing. Then he said, "These signs which Allah sends do not occur because of
the life or death of somebody, but Allah makes His worshipers afraid by
them. So when you see anything thereof, proceed to remember Allah,
invoke Him and ask for His forgiveness."

Volume 2, Book 18, Number 168:
Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba :
On the day of Ibrahim's death, the sun eclipsed and the people said that the
eclipse was due to the death of Ibrahim (the son of the Prophet). Allah's
Apostle said, "The sun and the moon are two signs amongst the signs of
Allah. They do not eclipse because of someone's death or life. So when you
see them, invoke Allah and pray till the eclipse is clear."
Volume 2, Book 18, Number 169:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
In the life-time of the Prophet the sun eclipsed and then he offered a two
Rakat prayer.

Volume 2, Book 18, Number 170:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
In the life-time of the Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) the sun eclipsed and he went
out dragging his clothes till he reached the Mosque. The people gathered
around him and he led them and offered two Rakat. When the sun (eclipse)
cleared, he said, "The sun and the moon are two signs amongst the signs of
Allah; they do not eclipse because of the death of someone, and so when an
eclipse occurs, pray and invoke Allah till the eclipse is over." It happened
that a son of the Prophet called Ibrahim died on that day and the people
were talking about that (saying that the eclipse was caused by his death).

Volume 2, Book 18, Number 171:
Narrated Aisha:
The Prophet led us and performed four bowing in two Rakat during the
solar eclipse and the first Raka was longer.

Volume 2, Book 18, Number 172:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) recited (the Quran) aloud during the eclipse prayer
and when he had finished the eclipse prayer he said the Takbir and bowed.
When he stood straight from bowing he would say "Sami 'al-l-ahu Lyman
hamidah Rabbana walaka-l-hamd." And he would again start reciting. In the
eclipse prayer there are four bowing and four prostrations in two Rakat. Al-
Auza'i and others said that they had heard Az-Zuhi from 'Ursa from 'Aisha
saying, "In the life-time of Allah's Apostle the sun eclipsed, and he made a
person to announce: 'Prayer in congregation.' He led the prayer and
performed four bowing and four prostrations in two Rakat." Narrated AlWalid that 'Abdur-Rahman bin Namir had informed him that he had heard
the same. Ibn Shihab heard the same. Az-Zuhrl said, "I asked ('Ursa), 'What
did your brother 'Abdullah bin AzZubair do? He prayed two Rakat (of the
eclipse prayer) like the morning prayer, when he offered the (eclipse) prayer
in Median.' 'Ursa replied that he had missed (i.e. did not pray according to)
the Prophet's tradition." Sulaiman bin Kathir and Sufyan bin Husain narrated
from Az-Zuhri that the prayer for the eclipse used to be offered with loud
recitation.
BOOK 19. PROSTRATION DURING RECITAL OF QUR'AN (173-185)
Volume 2, Book 19, Number 173:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Masud :
The Prophet recited Suratan-Najm (103) at Mecca and prostrated while
reciting it and those who were with him did the same except an old man
who took a handful of small stones or earth and lifted it to his forehead and
said, "This is sufficient for me." Later on, I saw him killed as a non-believer.

Volume 2, Book 19, Number 174:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
On Fridays the Prophet used to recite Alf Lam Mim Tanzil-As-Sajda (in the
first Raka) and Hal ata'alal-lnsani i.e. Suratad-Dahr (LXXVI) (in the second
Raka), in the Fajr prayer.

Volume 2, Book 19, Number 175:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The prostration of Sad is not a compulsory one but I saw the Prophet
prostrating while reciting it.

Volume 2, Book 19, Number 176:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Masud:
The Prophet recited Surat-an-Najm (53) and prostrated while reciting it and
all the people prostrated and a man amongst the people took a handful of
stones or earth and raised it to his face and said, "This is sufficient for me."
Later on I saw him killed as a non-believer.
Volume 2, Book 19, Number 177:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet I prostrated while reciting An-Najm and with him prostrated the
Muslims, the pagans, the jinns, and all human beings.

Volume 2, Book 19, Number 178:
Narrated 'Ata' bin Yasar:
I asked Zaid bin Thabit about prostration on which he said that he had
recited An-Najm before the Prophet, yet he (the Prophet) had not
performed a prostration.

Volume 2, Book 19, Number 179:
Narrated Zaid bin Thabit:
I recited An-Najm before the Prophet, yet he did not perform a prostration.

Volume 2, Book 19, Number 180:
Narrated Abu Salma:
I saw Abu Huraira reciting Idha-Sama' un-Shaqqat and he prostrated during
its recitation. I asked Abu Huraira, "Didn't I see you prostrating?" Abu
Huraira said, "Had I not seen the Prophet prostrating, I would not have
prostrated."

Volume 2, Book 19, Number 181:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
When the Prophet recited a Sura that contained the prostration he would
prostrate and we would do the same and some of us (because of the heavy
rush) could not find a place for prostration.

Volume 2, Book 19, Number 182:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar,
When the Prophet recited Surat As-Sajda and we were with him, he would
prostrate and we also would prostrate with him and some of us (because of
the heavy rush) would not find a place (for our foreheads) to prostrate on.

Volume 2, Book 19, Number 183:
Narrated Rabi'a:
'Umar bin Al-Khattab recited Surat-an-Nahl on a Friday on the pulpit and
when he reached the verse of Sajda he got down from the pulpit and
prostrated and the people also prostrated. The next Friday 'Umar bin AlKhattab recited the same Sura and when he reached the verse of Sajda he
said, "O people! When we recite the verses of Sajda (during the sermon)
whoever prostrates does the right thing, yet it is no sin for the one who
does not prostrate." And 'Umar did not prostrate (that day). Added Ibn
'Umar "Allah has not made the prostration of recitation compulsory but if
we wish we can do it."

Volume 2, Book 19, Number 184:
Narrated Abu Rafi:
I offered the 'Isha' prayer behind Abu Huraira and he recited Idhas-Sama'
Un-Shaqqat, and prostrated. I said, "What is this?" Abu Huraira said, "I
prostrated behind Abu-l-Qasim and I will do the same till I meet him."
Volume 2, Book 19, Number 185:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar.
Whenever the Prophet recited the Sura which contained the prostration of
recitation he used to prostrate and then, we, too, would prostrate and some
of us did not find a place for prostration.
BOOK 20. SHORTENING THE PRAYERS (AT-TAQSEER) (186-220)
Volume 2, Book 20, Number 186:
Narrated Ibn Abbas :
The Prophet once stayed for nineteen days and prayed shortened prayers.
So when we travel led (and stayed) for nineteen days, we used to shorten
the prayer but if we travelled (and stayed) for a longer period we used to
offer the full prayer.

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 187:
Narrated Yahya bin Ishaq:
I heard Anas saying, "We travelled with the Prophet from Medina to Mecca
and offered two Rakat (for every prayer) till we returned to Medina." I said,
"Did you stay for a while in Mecca?" He replied, "We stayed in Mecca for ten
days."

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 188:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
I offered the prayer with the Prophet, Abu Bakr and 'Umar at Mina and it
was of two Rakat. 'Uthman in the early days of his caliphate did the same,
but later on he started praying the full prayer.

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 189:
Narrated Haritha bin Wahab:
The Prophet I led us in the prayer at Mina during the peace period by
offering two Rakat.
Volume 2, Book 20, Number 190:
Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin Yazid:
We offered a four Rakat prayer at Mina behind Ibn 'Affan . 'Abdullah bin
Masud was informed about it. He said sadly, "Truly to Allah we belong and
truly to Him we shall return." And added, "I prayed two Rakat with Allah's
Apostle at Mina and similarly with Abu Bakr and with 'Umar (during their
caliphates)." He further said, "May I be lucky enough to have two of the four
Rakat accepted (by Allah)."

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 191:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet and his companions reached Mecca in the morning of the 4th
Dhul-Hijja reciting Talbiya (O Allah! We are obedient to your orders, we
respond 4 to your call) . . . intending to perform Hajj. The Prophet ordered
his companions to assume the lhram for Umra instead of Hajj, excepting
those who had Hadi (sacrifice) with them.

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 192:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "A woman should not travel for more than three days
except with a Dhi-Mahram (i.e. a male with whom she cannot marry at all,
e.g. her brother, father, grandfather, etc.) or her own husband.)"

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 193:
Narrated Ibn'Umar:
The Prophet said, "A woman should not travel for more than three days
except with a Dhi-Mahram."
Volume 2, Book 20, Number 194:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "It is not permissible for a woman who believes
in Allah and the Last Day to travel for one day and night except with a
Mahram."

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 195:
Narrated Anas bin Malik :
offered four Rakat of Zuhr prayer with the Prophet (p.b.u.h) at Medina and
two Rakat at Dhul-Hulaifa. (i.e. shortened the 'Asr prayer).

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 196:
Narrated 'Aisha:
"When the prayers were first enjoined they were of two Rakat each. Later
the prayer in a journey was kept as it was but the prayers for non-travellers
were completed." Az-Zuhri said, "I asked 'Urwa what made Aisha pray the
full prayers (in journey)." He replied, "She did the same as 'Uthman did."

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 197:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
"I saw Allah's Apostle delaying the Maghrib prayer till he offered it along
with the 'Isha' prayer whenever he was in a hurry during the journey." Salim
narrated, "Ibn 'Umar used to do the same whenever he was in a hurry
during the journey." And Salim added, "Ibn 'Umar used to pray the Maghrib
and 'Isha' prayers together in Al-Muzdalifa." Salim said, "Ibn 'Umar delayed
the Maghrib prayer because at that time he heard the news of the death of
his wife Safiya bint Abi 'Ubaid. I said to him, 'The prayer (is due).' He said,
'Go on.' Again I said, 'The prayer (is due).' He said, 'Go on,' till we covered
two or three miles. Then he got down, prayed and said, 'I saw the Prophet
praying in this way, whenever he was in a hurry during the journey.'
'Abdullah (bin 'Umar) added, "Whenever the Prophet was in a hurry, he
used to delay the Maghrib prayer and then offer three Rakat (of the
Maghrib) and perform Taslim, and after waiting for a short while, Iqama
used to be pronounced for the 'Isha' prayer when he would offer two Rakat
and perform Taslim. He would never offer any optional prayer till the middle
of the night (when he used to pray the Tahajjud)."

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 198:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amir from his father who said:
I saw the Prophet (p.b.u.h) offering the prayer on his mount (Rahila)
whatever direction it took.

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 199:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah,
The Prophet used to offer the Nawafil, while riding, facing a direction other
than that of the Qibla.

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 200:
Narrated Nafi:
Ibn 'Umar (while on a journey) used to offer the prayer and the Witr on his
mount (Rahila). He said that the Prophet used to do so.

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 201:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Dinar:
On traveling, 'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to offer the prayer on his Mount by
signs whatever direction it took. 'Abdullah said that the Prophet used to do
so.

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 202:
Narrated 'Amir bin Rabi'a,
I saw the Prophet on his Mount praying Nawafil by nodding his head,
whatever direction he faced, but Allah's Apostle never did the same in
offering the compulsory prayers. Narrated Salim: At night'Abdullah bin
'Umar used to offer the prayer on the back of his animal during the journey
and never cared about the direction he faced. Ibn 'Umar said, "Allah's
Apostle used to offer the optional prayer on the back of his Mount facing
any direction and also used to pray the Witr on it but never offered the
compulsory prayer on it."

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 203:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah
The Prophet used to pray (the Nawafil) on his Mount facing east and
whenever he wanted to offer the compulsory prayer, he used to dismount
and face the Qibla.

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 204:
Narrated Anas bin Sirin:
We went to receive Anas bin Malik when he returned from Sham and met
him at a place called 'Ain-at-Tamr. I saw him praying riding the donkey, with
his face to this direction, i.e. to the left of the Qibla. I said to him, "I have
seen you offering the prayer in a direction other than that of the Qibla." He
replied, "If I had not seen Allah's Apostle doing it, I would not have done it."
Volume 2, Book 20, Number 205:
Narrated Hafs bin 'Asim:
Ibn 'Umar went on a journey and said, "I accompanied the Prophet and he
did not offer optional prayers during the journey, and Allah says: 'Verily! In
Allah's Apostle you have a good example to follow.' " (33.21)

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 206:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar :
I accompanied Allah's Apostle and he never offered more than two Rakat
during the journey. Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman used to do the same.

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 207:
Narrated Ibn Abu Laila:
Only Um Hani told us that she had seen the Prophet (p.b.u.h) offering the
Duha (forenoon prayer). She said, "On the day of the conquest of Mecca,
the Prophet took a bath in my house and offered eight Rakat. I never saw
him praying such a light prayer but he performed perfect prostration and
bowing. Narrated 'Abdullah bin amir that his father had told him that he had
seen the Prophet (p.b.u.h) praying Nawafil at night on the back of his Mount
on a journey, facing whatever direction it took.

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 208:
Narrated Salim bin Abdullah:
Ibn 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle used to pray the Nawafil on the back of his
Mount (carriage) by signs facing any direction." Ibn 'Umar used to do the
same.
Volume 2, Book 20, Number 209:
Narrated Salim's father:
The Prophet used to offer the Maghrib and Isha' prayers together whenever
he was in a hurry on a journey.
Narrated Ibn Abbas: Allah's Apostle used to offer the Zuhr and 'Asr prayers
together on journeys, and also used to offer the Maghrib and 'Isha' prayers
together.
Narrated Anas bin Malik: The Prophet used to offer the Maghrib and the
'Isha' prayers together on journeys.

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 210:
Narrated Az-Zuhri:
Salim told me, "'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, 'I saw Allah's Apostle delaying the
Maghrib prayer till he offered it along with the Isha prayer whenever he was
in a hurry during the journey.' " Salim said, "Abdullah bin Umar used to do
the same whenever he was in a hurry during the journey. After making the
call for Iqama, for the Maghrib prayer he used to offer three Rakat and then
perform Tasllm. After waiting for a short while, he would pronounce the
Iqama for the 'Isha' prayer and offer two Rakat and perform Taslim. He
never prayed any Nawafil in between the two prayers or after the 'Isha'
prayers till he got up in the middle of the night (for Tahajjud prayer)."

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 211:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle used to offer these two prayers together on journeys i.e. the
Maghrib and the 'Isha'.

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 212:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Whenever the Prophet started a journey before noon, he used to delay the
Zuhr prayer till the time of 'Asr and then offer them together; and if the sun
declined (at noon) he used to offer the Zuhr prayer and then ride (for the
journey).

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 213:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Whenever the Prophet started the journey before noon, he used to delay
the Zuhr prayer till the time for the 'Asr prayer and then he would dismount
and pray them together; and whenever the sun declined before he started
the journey he used to offer the Zuhr prayer and then ride (for the journey).

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 214:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle prayed in his house while sitting during his illness and the
people prayed behind him standing and he pointed to them to sit down.
When he had finished the prayer, he said, "The Imam is to be followed and
so when he bows you should bow; and when he lifts his head you should
also do the same."

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 215:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) fell down from a horse and his right side was either
injured or scratched, so we went to inquire about his health. The time for
the prayer became due and he offered the prayer while sitting and we
prayed while standing. He said, "The Imam is to be followed; so if he says
Takbir, you should also say Takbir, and if he bows you should also bow; and
when he lifts his head you should also do the same and if he says: Sami'a-l-
lahu Liman Hamidah (Allah hears whoever sends his praises to Him) you
should say: Rabbana walakal-Hamd (O our Lord! All the praises are for You.")
(See Hadith No. 656 Vol. 1).

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 216:
Narrated 'Imran bin Husain:
(who had piles) I asked Allah's Apostle about the praying of a man while
sitting. He said, "If he prays while standing it is better and he who prays
while sitting gets half the reward of that who prays standing; and whoever
prays while Lying gets half the reward of that who prays while sitting."

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 217:
Narrated'Abdullah bin Buraida:
'Imran bin Husain had piles. Once Abu Ma mar narrated from 'Imran bin
Husain had said, "I asked the Prophet (p.b.u.h) about the prayer of a person
while sitting. He said, 'It is better for one to pray standing; and whoever
prays sitting gets half the reward of that who prays while standing; and
whoever prays while Lying gets half the reward of that who prays while
sitting.' "

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 218:
Narrated 'Imran bin Husain:
had piles, so I asked the Prophet about the prayer. He said, "Pray while
standing and if you can't, pray while sitting and if you cannot do even that,
then pray Lying on your side."

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 219:
Narrated Aisha
(the mother of the faithful believers) I never saw Allah's Apostle offering the
night prayer while sitting except in his old age and then he used to recite
while sitting and whenever he wanted to bow he would get up and recite
thirty or forty verses (while standing) and then bow.

Volume 2, Book 20, Number 220:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the mother of the faithful believers) Allah's Apostle (in his last days) used
to pray sitting. He would recite while sitting, and when thirty or forty verses
remained from the recitation he would get up and recite them while
standing and then he would bow and prostrate. He used to do the same in
the second Raka. After finishing the Prayer he used to look at me and if I
was awake he would talk to me and if I was asleep, he would lie down.
BOOK 21. PRAYER AT NIGHT (TAHAJJUD) (221-288)
Volume 2, Book 21, Number 221:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
When the Prophet got up at night to offer the Tahajjud prayer, he used to
say: Allahumma lakal-hamd. Anta qaiyimus-samawati wal-ard wa man
fihinna. Walakal-hamd, Laka mulkus-samawati wal-ard wa man fihinna.
Walakal-hamd, anta nurus-samawati wal-ard. Walakalhamd, anta-l-haq wa
wa'duka-l-haq, wa liqa'uka Haq, wa qualuka Haq, wal-jannatu Han wan-naru
Haq wannabiyuna Haq. Wa Muhammadun, sallal-lahu'alaihi wasallam, Haq,
was-sa'atu Haq. Allahumma aslamtu Laka wabika amantu, wa 'Alaika
tawakkaltu, wa ilaika anabtu wa bika khasamtu, wa ilaika hakamtu faghfir li
ma qaddamtu wama akh-khartu wama as-rartu wama'a lantu, anta-lmuqaddim wa anta-l-mu akh-khir, la ilaha illa anta (or la ilaha ghairuka). (O
Allah! All the praises are for you, You are the Holder of the Heavens and the
Earth, And whatever is in them. All the praises are for You; You have the
possession of the Heavens and the Earth And whatever is in them. All the
praises are for You; You are the Light of the Heavens and the Earth And all
the praises are for You; You are the King of the Heavens and the Earth; And
all the praises are for You; You are the Truth and Your Promise is the truth,
And to meet You is true, Your Word is the truth And Paradise is true And Hell
is true And all the Prophets (Peace be upon them) are true; And Muhammad
is true, And the Day of Resurrection is true. O Allah ! I surrender (my will) to
You; I believe in You and depend on You. And repent to You, And with Your
help I argue (with my opponents, the non-believers) And I take You as a
judge (to judge between us). Please forgive me my previous And future sins;
And whatever I concealed or revealed And You are the One who make
(some people) forward And (some) backward. There is none to be
worshipped but you . Sufyan said that 'Abdul Karim Abu Umaiya added to
the above, 'Wala haula Wala quwata illa billah' (There is neither might nor
power except with Allah).
Volume 2, Book 21, Number 222:
Narrated Salim's father:
In the life-time of the Prophet whosoever saw a dream would narrate it to
Allah's Apostle. I had a wish of seeing a dream to narrate it to Allah's Apostle
(p.b.u.h) I was a grown up boy and used to sleep in the Mosque in the lifetime of the Prophet. I saw in the dream that two angels caught hold of me
and took me to the Fire which was built all round like a built well and had
two poles in it and the people in it were known to me. I started saying, "I
seek refuge with Allah from the Fire." Then I met another angel who told me
not to be afraid. I narrated the dream to Hafsa who told it to Allah's Apostle.
The Prophet said, "Abdullah is a good man. I wish he prayed Tahajjud." After
that 'Abdullah (i.e. Salim's father) used to sleep but a little at night.

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 223:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle used to offer eleven Rakat and that was his prayer. He used
to prolong the prostration to such an extent that one could recite fifty
verses (of the Quran) before he would lift his head. He used to pray two
Rakat (Sunna) before the Fajr prayer and then used to lie down on his right
side till the call-maker came and informed him about the prayer.

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 224:
Narrated Jundab:
The Prophet became sick and did not get up (for Tahajjud prayer) for a night
or two.

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 225:
Narrated Jundab bin 'Abdullah :
Gabriel did not come to the Prophet (for some time) and so one of the
Quraish women said, "His Satan has deserted him." So came the Divine
Revelation: "By the forenoon And by the night When it is still! Your Lord (O
Muhammad) has neither Forsaken you Nor hated you." (93.1-3)

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 226:
Narrated Um Salama:
One night the Prophet got up and said, "Subhan Allah! How many afflictions
Allah has revealed tonight and how many treasures have been sent down
(disclosed). Go and wake the sleeping lady occupants of these dwellings up
(for prayers), perhaps a well-dressed in this world may be naked in the
Hereafter."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 227:
Narrated 'Ali bin Abi Talib
One night Allah's Apostle came to me and Fatima, the daughter of the
Prophet and asked, "Won't you pray (at night)?" I said, "O Allah's Apostle!
Our souls are in the hands of Allah and if He wants us to get up He will make
us get up." When I said that, he left us without saying anything and I heard
that he was hitting his thigh and saying, "But man is more quarrelsome than
anything." (18.54)

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 228:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle used to give up a good deed, although he loved to do it, for
fear that people might act on it and it might be made compulsory for them.
The Prophet never prayed the Duha prayer, but I offer it.
Volume 2, Book 21, Number 229:
Narrated 'Aisha, the mother of the faithful believers:
One night Allah's Apostle offered the prayer in the Mosque and the people
followed him. The next night he also offered the prayer and too many
people gathered. On the third and the fourth nights more people gathered,
but Allah's Apostle did not come out to them. In the morning he said, "I saw
what you were doing and nothing but the fear that it (i.e. the prayer) might
be enjoined on you, stopped me from coming to you." And that happened in
the month of Ramadan.

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 230:
Narrated Al-Mughira:
The Prophet used to stand (in the prayer) or pray till both his feet or legs
swelled. He was asked why (he offered such an unbearable prayer) and he
said, "should I not be a thankful slave."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 231:
Narrated Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As:
Allah's Apostle told me, "The most beloved prayer to Allah is that of David
and the most beloved fasts to Allah are those of David. He used to sleep for
half of the night and then pray for one third of the night and again sleep for
its sixth part and used to fast on alternate days."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 232:
Narrated Masruq:
I asked 'Aisha which deed was most loved by the Prophet. She said, "A deed
done continuously." I further asked, "When did he used to get up (in the
night for the prayer)." She said, "He used to get up on hearing the crowing
of a cock."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 233:
Narrated Al-Ashath:
He (the Prophet (p.b.u.h) ) used to get up for the prayer on hearing the
crowing of a cock.

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 234:
Narrated 'Aisha:
In my house he (Prophet (p.b.u.h) ) never passed the last hours of the night
but sleeping.

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 235:
Narrated Qatada:
Anas bin Malik said, "The Prophet (p.b.u.h) and Zaid bin Thabit took their
Suhur together. When they finished it, the Prophet stood for the (Fajr)
prayer and offered it." We asked Anas, "What was the interval between
their finishing the Suhur and the starting of the morning prayer?" Anas
replied, "It was equal to the time taken by a person in reciting fifty verses of
the Quran."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 236:
Narrated Abu-Wa il:
'Abdullah said, "One night I offered the Tahajjud prayer with the Prophet
and he kept on standing till an ill-thought came to me." We said, "What was
the ill-thought?" He said, "It was to sit down and leave the Prophet
(standing)."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 237:
Narrated Hudhaifa :
Whenever the Prophet got up for Tahajjud prayer he used to clean his
mouth (and teeth) with Siwak.

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 238:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar :
A man said, "O Allah's Apostle! How is the prayer of the night?" He said,
"Two Rakat followed by two Rakat and so on, and when you apprehend the
approaching dawn, offer one Raka as Witr."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 239:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The prayer of the Prophet used to be of thirteen Rakat, i.e. of the night
prayer.

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 240:
Narrated Masruq:
I asked Aisha about the night prayer of Allah's Apostle and she said, "It was
seven, nine or eleven Rakat besides the two Rakat of the Fajr prayer (i.e.
Sunna). "

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 241:
Narrated 'Aisha,
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to offer thirteen Rakat of the night prayer and
that included the Witr and two Rakat (Sunna) of the Fajr prayer.

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 242:
Narrated Anas bin Malik
Sometimes Allah's Apostle would not fast (for so many days) that we
thought that he would not fast that month and he sometimes used to fast
(for so many days) that we thought he would not leave fasting through-out
that month and (as regards his prayer and sleep at night), if you wanted to
see him praying at night, you could see him praying and if you wanted to see
him sleeping, you could see him sleeping.

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 243:
Narrated Abu Huraira
Allah's Apostle said, "Satan puts three knots at the back of the head of any
of you if he is asleep. On every knot he reads and exhales the following
words, 'The night is long, so stay asleep.' When one wakes up and
remembers Allah, one knot is undone; and when one performs ablution, the
second knot is undone, and when one prays the third knot is undone and
one gets up energetic with a good heart in the morning; otherwise one gets
up lazy and with a mischievous heart."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 244:
Narrated Samura bin Jundab:
The Prophet said in his narration of a dream that he saw, "He whose head
was being crushed with a stone was one who learnt the Quran but never
acted on it, and slept ignoring the compulsory prayers."
Volume 2, Book 21, Number 245:
Narrated 'Abdullah :
A person was mentioned before the Prophet (p.b.u.h) and he was told that
he had kept on sleeping till morning and had not got up for the prayer. The
Prophet said, "Satan urinated in his ears."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 246:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "Our Lord, the Blessed, the Superior, comes
every night down on the nearest Heaven to us when the last third of the
night remains, saying: "Is there anyone to invoke Me, so that I may respond
to invocation? Is there anyone to ask Me, so that I may grant him his
request? Is there anyone seeking My forgiveness, so that I may forgive him?"

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 247:
Narrated Al-Aswad:
I asked 'Aisha "How is the night prayer of the Prophet?" She replied, "He
used to sleep early at night, and get up in its last part to pray, and then
return to his bed. When the Muadh-dhin pronounced the Adhan, he would
get up. If he was in need of a bath he would take it; otherwise he would
perform ablution and then go out (for the prayer)."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 248:
Narrated Abu Salma bin 'Abdur Rahman:
I asked 'Aisha, "How is the prayer of Allah's Apostle during the month of
Ramadan." She said, "Allah's Apostle never exceeded eleven Rakat in
Ramadan or in other months; he used to offer four Rakat-- do not ask m
about their beauty and length, then four Rakat, do not ask me about their
beauty and length, and then three Rakat." Aisha further said, "I said, 'O
Allah's Apostle! Do you sleep before offering the Witr prayer?' He replied, 'O
'Aisha! My eyes sleep but my heart remains awake'!"

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 249:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I did not see the Prophet reciting (the Quran) in the night prayer while
sitting except when he became old; when he used to recite while sitting, and
when thirty or forty verses remained from the Sura, he would get up and
recite them and then bow.

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 250:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
At the time of the Fajr prayer the Prophet asked Bilal, "Tell me of the best
deed you did after embracing Islam, for I heard your footsteps in front of me
in Paradise." Bilal replied, "I did not do anything worth mentioning except
that whenever I performed ablution during the day or night, I prayed after
that ablution as much as was written for me."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 251r:
Narrated Anas bin Malik
Once the Prophet (p.b.u.h) entered the Mosque and saw a rope hanging in
between its two pillars. He said, "What is this rope?" The people said, "This
rope is for Zainab who, when she feels tired, holds it (to keep standing for
the prayer.)" The Prophet said, "Don't use it. Remove the rope. You should
pray as long as you feel active, and when you get tired, sit down."
Volume 2, Book 21, Number 251n:
Narrated 'Aisha:
A woman from the tribe of Bani Asad was sitting with me and Allah's
Apostle (p.b.u.h) came to my house and said, "Who is this?" I said, "(She is)
So and so. She does not sleep at night because she is engaged in prayer."
The Prophet said disapprovingly: Do (good) deeds which is within your
capacity as Allah never gets tired of giving rewards till you get tired of doing
good deeds."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 252:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As:
Allah's Apostle said to me, "O 'Abdullah! Do not be like so and so who used
to pray at night and then stopped the night prayer."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 253:
Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit:
The Prophet "Whoever gets up at night and says: -- 'La ilaha il-lallah
Wahdahu la Sharika lahu Lahu-l-mulk, waLahu-l-hamd wahuwa 'ala
kullishai'in Qadir. Alhamdu lil-lahi wa subhanal-lahi wa la-ilaha il-lal-lah wa-llahu akbar wa la hawla Wala Quwata il-la-bil-lah.' (None has the right to be
worshipped but Allah. He is the Only One and has no partners . For Him is
the Kingdom and all the praises are due for Him. He is Omnipotent. All the
praises are for Allah. All the glories are for Allah. And none has the right to
be worshipped but Allah, And Allah is Great And there is neither Might nor
Power Except with Allah). And then says: -- Allahumma, Ighfir li(O Allah!
Forgive me). Or invokes (Allah), he will be responded to and if he performs
ablution (and prays), his prayer will be accepted."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 254:
Narrated Abu Huraira
That once Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "Your brother, i.e. 'Abdullah bin
Rawaha does not say obscene (referring to his verses): Amongst us is Allah's
Apostle, who recites His Book when it dawns. He showed us the guidance,
after we were blind. We believe that whatever he says will come true. And
he spends his nights in such a way as his sides do not touch his bed. While
the pagans were deeply asleep."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 255:
Narrated Nafi:
Ibn 'Umar said, "In the life-time of the Prophet I dreamt that a piece of silk
cloth was in my hand and it flew with me to whichever part of Paradise I
wanted. I also saw as if two persons (i.e. angels) came to me and wanted to
take me to Hell. Then an angel met us and told me not to be afraid. He then
told them to leave me. Hafsa narrated one of my dreams to the Prophet and
the Prophet said, "Abdullah is a good man. Would that he offer the night
prayer (Tahajjud)!" So after that day 'Abdullah (bin 'Umar) started offering
Tahajjud. The companions of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to tell him their
dreams that (Laila-tul-Qadr) was on the 27th of the month of Ramadan. The
Prophet said, "I see that your dreams agree on the last ten nights of
Ramadan and so whoever is in search of it should seek it in the last ten
nights of Ramadan."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 256:
Narrated 'Aisha;
Allah's Apostle offered the 'Isha' prayer (and then got up at the Tahajjud
time) and offered eight Rakat and then offered two Rakat while sitting. He
then offered two Rakat in between the Adhan and Iqama (of the Fajr
prayer) and he never missed them.
Volume 2, Book 21, Number 257:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to lie down on his right side, after offering two Rakat
(Sunna) of the Fajr prayer.

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 258:
Narrated 'Aisha :
After offering the Sunna of the Fajr prayer, the Prophet used to talk to me, if
I happen to be awake; otherwise he would lie down till the Iqama call was
proclaimed (for the Fajr prayer).

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 259:
Narrated 'Aisha:
After offering the two Rakat (Sunna) the Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to talk to
me, if I happen to be awake; otherwise he would lie down.

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 260:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet was never more regular and particular in offering any Nawafil
than the two Rakat (Sunna) of the Fajr prayer.

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 261:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle used to offer thirteen Rakat in the night prayer and on
hearing the Adhan for the morning prayer, he used to offer two light Rakat.
Volume 2, Book 21, Number 262:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to make the two Rakat before the Fajr prayer so
light that I would wonder whether he recited Al-Fatiha (or not).

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 263:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to teach us the way of doing Istikhara (Istikhara
means to ask Allah to guide one to the right sort of action concerning any
job or a deed), in all matters as he taught us the Suras of the Quran. He said,
"If anyone of you thinks of doing any job he should offer a two Rakat prayer
other than the compulsory ones and say (after the prayer): -- 'Allahumma
inni astakhiruka bi'ilmika, Wa astaqdiruka bi-qudratika, Wa as'alaka min
fadlika al-'azlm Fa-innaka taqdiru Wala aqdiru, Wa ta'lamu Wala a'lamu, Wa
anta 'allamu l-ghuyub. Allahumma, in kunta ta'lam anna hadha-l-amra
Khairun li fi dini wa ma'ashi wa'aqibati amri (or 'ajili amri wa'ajilihi) Faqdirhu
wa yas-sirhu li thumma barik li Fihi, Wa in kunta ta'lamu anna hadha-lamra
shar-run li fi dini wa ma'ashi wa'aqibati amri (or fi'ajili amri wa ajilihi) Fasrifhu
anni was-rifni anhu. Waqdir li al-khaira haithu kana Thumma ardini bihi.' (O
Allah! I ask guidance from Your knowledge, And Power from Your Might and
I ask for Your great blessings. You are capable and I am not. You know and I
do not and You know the unseen. O Allah! If You know that this job is good
for my religion and my subsistence and in my Hereafter--(or said: If it is
better for my present and later needs)--Then You ordain it for me and make
it easy for me to get, And then bless me in it, and if You know that this job is
harmful to me In my religion and subsistence and in the Hereafter--(or said:
If it is worse for my present and later needs)--Then keep it away from me
and let me be away from it. And ordain for me whatever is good for me, And
make me satisfied with it). The Prophet added that then the person should
name (mention) his need.
Volume 2, Book 21, Number 264:
Narrated Abu Qatada bin Rabi Al-Ansari;
The Prophet said, "If anyone of you enters a Mosque, he should not sit until
he has offered a two-Rakat prayer."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 265:
Narrated Anas bin Malik
Allah's Apostle led us and offered a two Rakat prayer and then went away.

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 266:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar Abu,
I offered with Allah's Apostle a two Rakat prayer before the Zuhr prayer and
two Rakat after the Zuhr prayer, two Rakat after Jumua, Maghrib and 'Isha'
prayers.

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 267:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :
While delivering a sermon, Allah's Apostle said, "If anyone of you comes
while the Imam is delivering the sermon or has come out for it, he should
offer a two Rakat prayer."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 268:
Narrated Mujahid:
Somebody came to the house of Ibn 'Umar and told him that Allah's
Apostles had entered the Ka'ba. Ibn 'Umar said, "I went in front of the Ka'ba
and found that Allah's Apostle had come out of the Ka'ba and I saw Bilal
standing by the side of the gate of the Ka'ba. I said, 'O Bilal! Has Allah's
Apostle (p.b.u.h) prayed inside the Ka'ba?' Bilal replied in the affirmative. I
said, 'Where (did he pray)?' He replied, '(He prayed) Between these two
pillars and then he came out and offered a two Rakat prayer in front of the
Ka'ba.' " Abu 'Abdullah said: Abu Huraira said, "The Prophet (p.b.u.h)
advised me to offer two Rakat of Duha prayer (prayer to be offered after
sunrise and before midday). " Itban (bin Malik) said, "Allah's Apostle
(p.b.u.h) and Abu Bakr, came to me after sunrise and we aligned behind the
Prophet (p.b.u.h) and offered two Rakat."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 269:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
I offered with the Prophet two Rakat before the Zuhr and two Rakat after
the Zuhr prayer; two Rakat after Maghrib, Isha' and the Jumua prayers.
Those of the Maghrib and 'Isha' were offered in his house. My sister Hafsa
told me that the Prophet used to offer two light Rakat after dawn and it was
the time when I never went to the Prophet."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 270:
Narrated 'Amr:
I heard Abu Ash-sha'tha' Jabir saying, "I heard Ibn Abbas saying, 'I offered
with Allah's Apostle eight Rakat (of Zuhr and 'Asr prayers) together and
seven Rakat (the Maghrib and the 'Isha' prayers) together.' " I said, "O Abu
Ash-shatha! I think he must have prayed the Zuhr late and the 'Asr early; the
'Isha early and the Maghrib late." Abu Ash-sha'tha' said, "I also think so."
(See Hadith No. 518 Vol. 1).
Volume 2, Book 21, Number 271:
Narrated Muwarriq:
I asked Ibn 'Umar "Do you offer the Duha prayer?" He replied in the
negative. I further asked, "Did 'Umar use to pray it?" He (Ibn 'Umar) replied
in the negative. I again asked, "Did Abu Bakr use to pray it?" He replied in the
negative. I again asked, "Did the Prophet use to pray it?" Ibn 'Umar replied,
"I don't think he did."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 272:
Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin Abi Laila:
Only Um Hani narrated to me that she had seen the Prophet offering the
Duha prayer. She said, "On the day of the conquest of Mecca, the Prophet
entered my house, took a bath and offered eight Rakat (of Duha prayers. I
had never seen the Prophet offering such a light prayer but he performed
bowing and prostrations perfectly .

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 273:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I never saw the Prophet offering the Duha prayer but I always offer it.

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 274:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
My friend (the Prophet) advised me to do three things and I shall not leave
them till I die, these are: To fast three days every month, to offer the Duha
prayer, and to offer Witr before sleeping.

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 275t:
Narrated Anas bin Sirin:
I heard Anas bin Malik al-Ansari saying, "An Ansari man, who was very fat,
said to the Prophet, 'I am unable to present myself for the prayer with you.'
He prepared a meal for the Prophet and invited him to his house. He washed
one side of a mat with water and the Prophet offered two Rakat on it." So
and so, the son of so and so, the son of Al-Jarud asked Anas, "Did the
Prophet use to offer the Duha prayer?" Anas replied, "I never saw him
praying (the Duha prayer) except on that day."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 275:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
I remember ten Rakat of Nawafil from the Prophet, two Rakat before the
Zuhr prayer and two after it; two Rakat after Maghrib prayer in his house,
and two Rakat after 'Isha' prayer in his
house, and two Rakat before the Fajr prayer and at that time nobody would
enter the house of the Prophet Hafsa told me that the Prophet used to offer
two Rakat after the call maker had made the Adhan and the day had
dawned.

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 276:
Narrated Aisha:
The Prophet never missed four Rakat before the Zuhr prayer and two Rakat
before the Fajr prayer.

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 277:
Narrated 'Abdullah Al-Muzni:
The Prophet said, "Pray before the Maghrib (compulsory) prayer." He (said
it thrice) and in the third time, he said, "Whoever wants to offer it can do
so." He said so because he did not like the people to take it as a tradition.

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 278:
Narrated Marthad bin 'Abdullah Al-Yazani:
I went to 'Uqba bin 'Amir Al-Juhani and said, "Is it not surprising that Abi
Tamim offers two Rakat before the Maghrib prayer?" 'Uqba said, "We used
to do so in the life-time of Allah's Apostle." I asked him, "What prevents you
from offering it now?" He replied, "Business."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 279:
Narrated Mahmud bin Ar-rabi' Al-Ansari,
that he remembered Allah's Apostle and he also remembered a mouthful of
water which he had thrown on his face, after taking it from a well that was
in their house. Mahmud said that he had heard Itban bin Malik, who was
present with Allah's Apostle in the battle of Badr saying, "I used to lead my
people at Bani Salim in the prayer and there was a valley between me and
those people. Whenever it rained it used to be difficult for me to cross it to
go to their mosque. So I went to Allah's Apostle and said, 'I have weak eyesight and the valley between me and my people flows during the rainy
season and it becomes difficult for me to cross it; I wish you would come to
my house and pray at a place so that I could take that place as a praying
place.' Allah's Apostle said, 'I will do so.' So Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr
came to my house in the (next) morning after the sun had risen high. Allah's
Apostle asked my permission to let him in and I admitted him. He did not sit
before saying, 'Where do you want us to offer the prayer in your house?' I
pointed to the place where I wanted him to pray. So Allah's Apostle stood
up for the prayer and started the prayer with Takbir and we aligned in rows
behind him; and he offered two Rakat, and finished them with Taslim, and
we also performed Taslim with him. I detained him for a meal called "Khazir"
which I had prepared for him.--("Khazir" is a special type of dish prepared
from barley flour and meat soup)-When the neighbors got the news that Allah's Apostle was in my house,
they poured it till there were a great number of men in the house. One of
them said, 'What is wrong with Malik, for I do not see him?' One of them
replied, 'He is a hypocrite and does not love Allah and His Apostle.' On that
Allah's Apostle said, 'Don't say this. Haven't you seen that he said, 'None has
the right to be worshipped but Allah for Allah's sake only.' The man replied,
'Allah and His Apostle know better; but by Allah, we never saw him but
helping and talking with the hypocrites.' Allah's Apostle replied, 'No doubt,
whoever says. None has the right to be worshipped but Allah, and by that he
wants the pleasures of Allah, then Allah will save him from Hell." Mahmud
added, "I told the above narration to some people, one of whom was Ab-u
Aiyub, the companion of Allah's Apostle in the battle in which he (Ab-u
Aiyub) died and Yazid bin Mu'aw7ya was their leader in Roman Territory.
Abu Aiyub denounced the narration and said, 'I doubt that Allah's Apostle
ever said what you have said.' I felt that too much, and I vowed to Allah that
if I remained alive in that holy battle, I would (go to Medina and) ask Itban
bin Malik if he was still living in the mosque of his people. So when he
returned, I assumed Ihram for Hajj or 'Umra and then I proceeded on till I
reached Medina. I went to Bani Salim and Itban bin Malik, who was by then
an old blind man, was leading his people in the prayer. When he finished the
prayer, I greeted him and introduced myself to him and then asked him
about that narration. He told that narration again in the same manner as he
had narrated it the first time."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 280:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar,
Allah's Apostle said, "Offer some of your prayers in your houses and do not
make them graves."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 281:
Narrated Quza'a:
I heard Abu Said saying four words. He said, "I heard the Prophet (saying the
following narrative)." He had participated in twelve holy battles with the
Prophet.
Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet said, "Do not set out on a journey except
for three Mosques i.e. Al-Masjid-AI-Haram, the Mosque of Allah's Apostle ,
and the Mosque of Al-Aqsa, (Mosque of Jerusalem)."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 282:
Narrated Abu Huraira
Allah's Apostle said, "One prayer in my Mosque is better than one thousand
prayers in any other mosque excepting Al-Masjid-AI-Haram."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 283:
Narrated Nafi':
Ibn 'Umar never offered the Duha prayer except on two occasions:
(1) Whenever he reached Mecca; and he always used to reach Mecca in the
forenoon. He would perform Tawaf round the Ka'ba and then offer two
Rakat at the rear of Maqam Ibrahim.
(2) Whenever he visited Quba, for he used to visit it every Saturday. When
he entered the Mosque, he disliked to leave it without offering a prayer. Ibn
'Umar narrated that Allah's Apostle used to visit the Mosque of Quba
(sometime) walking and (sometime) riding. And he (i.e. Ibn 'Umar) used to
say, "I do only what my companions used to do and I don't forbid anybody
to pray at any time during the day or night except that one should not
intend to pray at sunrise or sunset."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 284:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Dinar:
Ibn 'Umar said, "The Prophet used to go to the Mosque of Quba every
Saturday (sometimes) walking and (sometimes) riding." 'Abdullah (Ibn
'Umar) used to do the same.

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 285:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet used to go to the Mosque of Quba (sometimes) walking and
sometimes riding. Added Nafi (in another narration), "He then would offer
two Rakat (in the Mosque of Quba)."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 286:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid Al-Mazini:
Allah's Apostle said, "Between my house and the pulpit there is a garden of
the gardens of Paradise."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 287:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Between my house and my pulpit there is a garden of the
gardens of Paradise, and my pulpit is on my fountain tank (i.e. Al-Kauthar)."

Volume 2, Book 21, Number 288:
Narrated Qaza'a Maula:
(freed slave of) Ziyad: I heard Abu Said Al-khudri narrating four things from
the Prophet and I appreciated them very much. He said, conveying the
words of the Prophet.
(1) "A woman should not go on a two day journey except with her husband
or a Dhi-Mahram.
(2) No fasting is permissible on two days: 'Id-ul-Fitr and 'Id-ul-Adha.
(3) No prayer after two prayers, i.e. after the Fajr prayer till the sunrises and
after the 'Asr prayer till the sun sets.
(4) Do not prepare yourself for a journey except to three Mosques, i.e. AlMasjid-AI-Haram, the Mosque of Aqsa (Jerusalem) and my Mosque."
BOOK 22. ACTIONS WHILE PRAYING (289-328)
Volume 2, Book 22, Number 289:
Narrated Kuraib Maula Ibn Abbas:
'Abdullah bin Abbas said that he had passed a night in the house of
Maimuna the mother of the faithful believers , who was his aunt. He said, "I
slept across the bed, and Allah's Apostle along with his wife slept
lengthwise. Allah's Apostle slept till mid-night or slightly before or after it.
Then Allah's Apostle woke up, sat, and removed the traces of sleep by
rubbing his hands over his face. Then he recited the last ten verses of SuratAl Imran (2). Then he went towards a hanging leather water-container and
performed a perfect ablution and then stood up for prayer." 'Abdullah bin
Abbas added, "I got up and did the same as Allah's Apostle had done and
then went and stood by his side. Allah's Apostle then put his right hand over
my head and caught my right ear and twisted it. He offered two Rakat, then
two Rakat, then two Rakat, then two Rakat, then two Rakat, then two Rakat
and then offered one Raka Witr. Then he lay down till the Muadh-dhin came
and then he prayed two light Rakat and went out and offered the early
morning (Fajr) prayer."

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 290:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
We used to greet the Prophet while he was praying and he used to answer
our greetings. When we returned from AnNajashi (the ruler of Ethiopia), we
greeted him, but he did not answer us (during the prayer) and (after
finishing the prayer) he said, "In the prayer one is occupied (with a more
serious matter)."

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 291:
Narrated 'Abdullah
the same as No. 290. from the Prophet

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 292:
Narrated Zaid bin Arqam:
In the life-time of the Prophet we used to speak while praying, and one of us
would tell his needs to his companions, till the verse, 'Guard strictly your
prayers (2.238) was revealed. After that we were ordered to remain silent
while praying.

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 293:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
The Prophet went out to affect a reconciliation between the tribes of Bani
'Amr bin 'Auf and the time of the prayer became due; Bilal went to Abu Bakr
and said, "The Prophet is detained. Will you lead the people in the prayer?"
Abu Bakr replied, "Yes, if you wish." So Bilal pronounced the Iqama and Abu
Bakr led the prayer. In the meantime the Prophet came crossing the rows
(of the praying people) till he stood in the first row and the people started
clapping. Abu Bakr never looked hither and thither during the prayer but
when the people clapped too much, he looked back and saw the Prophet in
the (first) row. The Prophet waved him to remain at his place, but Abu Bakr
raised both his hands and sent praises to Allah and then retreated and the
Prophet went forward and led the prayer. (See Hadith No. 295 & 296)

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 294:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Masud:
We used to say the greeting, name and greet each other in the prayer.
Allah's Apostle heard it and said:--"Say, 'At-tahiyyatu lil-lahi was-salawatu
wat-taiyibatu . Assalamu 'Alaika aiyuha-n-Nabiyu wa-rahmatu-l-lahi wabarakatuhu. _ Assalamu alaina wa-'ala 'ibadi-l-lahi as-salihin.. Ashhadu an la
ilaha illa-l-lah wa ashhadu anna Muhammadan 'abdu hu wa Rasuluh. (All the
compliments are for Allah and all the prayers and all the good things (are for
Allah). Peace be on you, O Prophet, and Allah's mercy and blessings (are on
you). And peace be on us and on the good (pious) worshipers of Allah. I
testify that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and that
Muhammad is His slave and Apostle.) So, when you have said this, then you
have surely sent the greetings to every good (pious) worship per of Allah,
whether he be in the Heaven or on the Earth . "

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 295:
Narrated Abu Huraira :
The Prophet said, "The saying 'Sub Han Allah' is for men and clapping is for
women." (If something happens in the prayer, the men can invite the
attention of the Imam by saying "Sub Han Allah". And women, by clapping
their hands).

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 296:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad,
The Prophet said, "The saying 'Sub Han Allah' is for men and clapping is for
women.

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 297:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
While Abu Bakr was leading the people in the morning prayer on a Monday,
the Prophet came towards them suddenly having lifted the curtain of
'Aisha's house, and looked at them as they were standing in rows and
smiled. Abu Bakr tried to come back thinking that Allah's Apostle wanted to
come out for the prayer. The attention of the Muslims was diverted from
the prayer because they were delighted to see the Prophet. The Prophet
waved his hand to them to complete their prayer, then he went back into
the room and let down the curtain. The Prophet expired on that very day.

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 297m:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "A woman called her son while he was in his hermitage
and said, 'O Juraij' He said, 'O Allah, my mother (is calling me) and (I am
offering) my prayer (what shall I do)?' She again said, 'O Juraij!' He said
again, 'O Allah ! My mother (is calling me) and (I am offering) my prayer
(what shall I do)?' She again said, 'O Juraij' He again said, 'O Allah! My
mother (is calling me) and (I am offering) my prayer. (What shall I do?)' She
said, 'O Allah! Do not let Juraij die till he sees the faces of prostitutes.' A
shepherdess used to come by his hermitage for grazing her sheep and she
gave birth to a child. She was asked whose child that was, and she replied
that it was from Juraij and that he had come out from his hermitage. Juraij
said, 'Where is that woman who claims that her child is from me?' (When she
was brought to him along with the child), Juraij asked the child, 'O Babus,
who is your father?' The child replied, 'The shepherd.' " (See Hadith No 662.
Vol 3).

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 298:
Narrated Mu'aiqib:
The Prophet talked about a man leveling the earth on prostrating, and said,
"If you have to do so, then do it once."

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 299:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
We used to pray with the Prophet in scorching heat, and if someone of us
could not put his face on the earth (because of the heat) then he would
spread his clothes and prostrate over them.

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 300:
Narrated Aisha:
I used to stretch my legs towards the Qibla of the Prophet while he was
praying; whenever he prostrated he touched me, and I would withdraw my
legs, and whenever he stood up, I would restretch my legs.

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 301:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet once offered the prayer and said, "Satan came in front of me
and tried to interrupt my prayer, but Allah gave me an upper hand on him
and I choked him. No doubt, I thought of tying him to one of the pillars of
the mosque till you get up in the morning and see him. Then I remembered
the statement of Prophet Solomon, 'My Lord ! Bestow on me a kingdom
such as shall not belong to any other after me.' Then Allah made him (Satan)
return with his head down (humiliated)."

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 302:
Narrated Al-Azraq bin Qais:
We were at Al-Ahwaz fighting the AlHaruriya (tribe). While I was at the bank
of a river a man was praying and the reins of his animal were in his hands
and the animal was struggling and he was following the animal. (Shu'ba, a
sub-narrator, said that man was Abu Barza al-Aslaml). A man from the
Khawarij said, "O Allah! Be harsh to this sheik." And when the sheik (Abu
Barza) finished his prayer, he said, "I heard your remark. No doubt, I
participated with Allah's Apostle in six or seven or eight holy battles and saw
his leniency, and no doubt, I would rather retain my animal than let it return
to its stable, as it would cause me much trouble. "

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 303:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Once the sun eclipsed and Allah's Apostle stood up for the prayer and
recited a very long Sura and when bowed for a long while and then raised
his head and started reciting another Sura. Then he bowed, and after
finishing, he prostrated and did the same in the second Raka and then said,
"These (lunar and solar eclipses) are two of the signs of Allah and if you see
them, pray till the eclipse is over. No doubt, while standing at this place I
saw everything promised to me by Allah and I saw (Paradise) and I wanted
to pluck a bunch (of grapes) therefrom, at the time when you saw me
stepping forward. No doubt, I saw Hell with its different parts destroying
each other when you saw me retreating and in it I saw 'Amr bin Luhai who
started the tradition of freeing animals (set them free) in the name of idols."

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 304:
Narrated Ibn'Umar:
The Prophet saw some sputum on the wall facing the Qibla of the mosque
and became furious with the people of the mosque and said, "During the
prayer, Allah is in front of everyone of you and so he should not spit (or said,
'He should not expectorate')." Then he got down and scratched the sputum
with his hand. Ibn 'Umar said (after narrating), "If anyone of you has to spit
during the prayer, he should spit to his left."

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 305:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "Whenever anyone of you is in prayer, he is speaking in
private to his Lord and so he should neither spit in front of him nor on his
right side but to his left side under his left foot."

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 306:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
The people used to offer the prayer with the Prophet with their waist-sheets
tied round their necks because of the shortness of the sheets and the
women were ordered not to lift their heads till the men had sat straight.

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 307:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
I used to greet the Prophet while he was in prayer and he would return my
greeting, but when we returned (from Ethiopia) I greeted the Prophet
(while he was praying) but he did not return the greeting, and (after
finishing the prayer) he said, "In the prayer one is occupied (with a more
serious matter)."

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 308:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle sent me for some job and when I had finished it I returned
and came to the Prophet and greeted him but he did not return my greeting.
So I felt so sorry that only Allah knows it and I said to myself,, 'Perhaps
Allah's Apostle is angry because I did not come quickly, then again I greeted
him but he did not reply. I felt even more sorry than I did the first time.
Again I greeted him and he returned the greeting and said, "The thing which
prevented me from returning the greeting was that I was praying." And at
that time he was on his Rahila and his face was not towards the Qibla.
Volume 2, Book 22, Number 309:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
The news about the differences amongst the people of Bani 'Amr bin 'Auf at
Quba reached Allah's Apostle and so he went to them along with some of
his companions to affect a reconciliation. Allah's Apostle was delayed there
and the time for the prayer became due. Bilal came to Abu Bakr! and said, "O
Abu Bakr! Allah's Apostle is detained (there) and the time for the prayer is
due. Will you lead the people in prayer?" Abu Bakr replied, "Yes, if you wish."
So Bilal pronounced the Iqama and Abu Bakr went forward and the people
said Takbir. In the meantime, Allah's Apostle came piercing through the
rows till he stood in the (first) row and the people started clapping. Abu
Bakr, would never look hither and thither during the prayer but when the
people clapped much he looked back and saw Allah's Apostle. The Prophet
beckoned him to carry on. Abu Bakr raised both his hands, praised Allah and
retreated till he stood in the row and Allah's Apostle went forward and led
the people in the prayer. When he had finished the prayer, he addressed the
people and said, "O people! Why did you start clapping when something
happened to you in the prayer? Clapping is for women. Whenever one is
confronted with something unusual in the prayer one should say, 'Sub Han
Allah'." Then the Prophet looked towards Abu Bakr and asked, "What
prevented you from leading the prayer when I beckoned you to carry on?"
Abu Bakr replied, "It does not befit the son of Al Quhafa to lead the prayer in
the presence of Allah's Apostle

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 310:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
It was forbidden to keep the hands on the hips during the prayer. (This is
narrated by Abu Huraira from the Prophet.)

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 311:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
It was forbidden to pray with the hands over one's hips.

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 312:
Narrated 'Uqba bin Al-Harith:
I offered the 'Asr prayer with the Prophet and after finishing the prayer with
Taslim he got up quickly and went to some of his wives and then came out.
He noticed the signs of astonishment on the faces of the people caused by
his speed. He then said, "I remembered while I was in my prayer that a piece
of gold was Lying in my house and I disliked that it should remain with us
throughout the night, and so I have ordered it to be distributed."

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 313:
Narrated Abu Huraira,
Allah's Apostle said, "When the Adhan for the prayer is pronounced, then
Satan takes to his heels passing wind so that he may not hear the Adhan and
when the Muadh-dhin finishes, he comes back; and when the Iqama is
pronounced he again takes to his heels and when it is finished, he again
comes back and continues reminding the praying person of things that he
used not to remember when not in prayer till he forgets how much he has
prayed." Abu Salama bin 'Abdur-Rahman said, "If anyone of you has such a
thing (forgetting the number of Rakat he has prayed) he should perform
two prostrations of Sahu (i.e. forgetfulness) while sitting." Abu Salama
narrates this from Abu Huraira.

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 314:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
People say that I narrate too many narrations of the Prophet; once I met a
man (during the life-time of the Prophet) and asked him, "Which Sura did
Allah's Apostle s recite yesterday in the 'Isha' prayer?" He said, "I do not
know." I said, "Did you not attend the prayer?" He said, "Yes, (I did)." I said,
"I know. He recited such and such Sura."

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 315:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Buhaina :
Allah's Apostle once led us in a prayer and offered two Rakat and got up (for
the third Raka) without sitting (after the second Raka). The people also got
up with him, and when he was about to finish his prayer, we waited for him
to finish the prayer with Taslim but he said Takbir before Taslim and
performed two prostrations while sitting and then finished the prayer with
Taslim.

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 316:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Buhaina:
Allah's Apostle got up after the second Raka of the Zuhr prayer without
sitting in between (the second and the third Rakat). When he finished the
prayer he performed two prostrations (of Sahu) and then finished the
prayer with Tasllm.

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 317:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
Once Allah's Apostle offered five Rakat in the Zuhr prayer, and somebody
asked him whether there was some increase in the prayer. Allah's Apostle
said, "What is that?" He said, "You have offered five Rakat." So Allah's
Apostle performed two prostrations of Sahu after Taslim.

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 318:
Narrated Abu Huraira
The Prophet led us in the 'Asr or the Zuhr prayer and finished it with Taslim.
Dhul-Yadain said to him, "O Allah's Apostle! Has the prayer been reduced?"
The Prophet asked his companions in the affirmative. So Allah's Apostle I
offered two more Rakat and then performed two prostrations (of Sahu).
Sad said, "I saw that 'Ursa bin Az-Zubair had offered two Rakat in the
Maghrib prayer and finished it with Taslim. He then talked (and when he was
informed about it) he completed the rest of his prayer and performed two
prostrations, and said, 'The Prophet prayed like this.' "

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 319:
Narrated Abu Huraira.
Once Allah's Apostle offered two Rakat and finished his prayer. So DhulYadain asked him, "Has the prayer been reduced or have you forgotten?"
Allah's Apostle said, "Has DhulYadain spoken the truth?" The people replied
in the affirmative. Then Allah's Apostle stood up and offered the remaining
two Rakat and performed Taslim, and then said Takbir and performed two
prostrations like his usual prostrations, or a bit longer, and then got up.

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 320:
Narrated Salama bin 'Alqama:
I asked Muhammad (bin Sirin) whether Tashah-hud should be recited after
the two prostrations of Sahu. He replied, "It is not (mentioned) in Abu
Huraira's narration . "

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 321:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet offered one of the evening prayers (the sub-narrator
Muhammad said, "I think that it was most probably the 'Asr prayer") and he
finished it after offering two Rakat only. He then stood near a price of wood
in front of the Mosque and put his hand over it. Abu Bakr and 'Umar were
amongst those who were present, but they dared not talk to him about that
(because of excessive respect for him), and those who were in a hurry went
out. They said, "Has the prayer been reduced?" A man who was called
DhulYadain by the Prophet said (to the Prophet), "Has the prayer been
reduced or have you forgotten?" He said, "Neither have I forgotten, nor has
the prayer been reduced." He said, "Certainly you have forgotten." So the
Prophet offered two more Rakat and performed Tashm and then said Takbir
and performed a prostration of Sahu like his ordinary prostration or a bit
longer and then raised his head and said Takbir and then put his head down
and performed a prostration like his ordinary prostration or a bit longer, and
then raised his head and said Takbir.

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 322:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Buhaina Al-Asdi:
(the ally of Bani 'Abdul Muttalib) Allah's Apostle stood up for the Zuhr
prayer and he should have sat (after the second Raka but he stood up for
the third Raka without sitting for Tashah-hud) and when he finished the
prayer he performed two prostrations and said Takbir on each prostration
while sitting, before ending (the prayer) with Taslim; and the people too
performed the two prostrations with him instead of the sitting he forgot.

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 323:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "When the call for prayer is made, Satan takes to his
heels passing wind so that he may not hear the Adhan and when the call is
finished he comes back, and when the Iqama is pronounced, Satan again
takes to his heels, and when the Iqama is finished he comes back again and
tries to interfere with the person and his thoughts and say, "Remember this
and that (which he has not thought of before the prayer)", till the praying
person forgets how much he has prayed. If anyone of you does not
remember whether he has offered three or four Rakat then he should
perform two prostrations of Sahu while sitting.

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 324:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "When anyone of you stands for the prayers, Satan
comes and puts him in doubts till he forgets how many Rakat he has prayed.
So if this happens to anyone of you, he should perform two prostrations of
Sahu while sitting.

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 325:
Narrated Kuraib:
I was sent to Aisha by Ibn Abbas, Al-Miswar bin Makhrama and 'AbdurRahman bin Azhar . They told me to greet her on their behalf and to ask her
about the offering of the two Rakat after the 'Asr prayer and to say to her,
"We were informed that you offer those two Rakat and we were told that
the Prophet had forbidden offering them." Ibn Abbas said, "I along with
'Umar bin Al-Khattab used to beat the people whenever they offered them."
I went to Aisha and told her that message. 'Aisha said, "Go and ask Um
Salama about them." So I returned and informed them about her statement.
They then told me to go to Um Salama with the same question with which t
sent me to 'Aisha. Um Salama replied, "I heard the Prophet forbidding them.
Later I saw him offering them immediately after he prayed the 'Asr prayer.
He then entered my house at a time when some of the Ansari women from
the tribe of Bani Haram were sitting with me, so I sent my slave girl to him
having said to her, 'Stand beside him and tell him that Um Salama says to
you, "O Allah's Apostle! I have heard you forbidding the offering of these
(two Rakat after the 'Asr prayer) but I have seen you offering them." If he
waves his hand then wait for him.' The slave girl did that. The Prophet
beckoned her with his hand and she waited for him. When he had finished
the prayer he said, "O daughter of Bani Umaiya! You have asked me about
the two Rakat after the 'Asr prayer. The people of the tribe of 'Abdul-Qais
came to me and made me busy and I could not offer the two Rakat after the
Zuhr prayer. These (two Rakat that I have just prayed) are for those (missed)
ones.

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 326:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi :
The news about the differences amongst the people of Bani'Amr bin 'Auf
reached Allah's Apostle and so he went to them along with some of his
companions to affect a reconciliation between them. Allah's Apostle was
delayed there, and the time of the prayer was due. Bilal went to Abu Bakr
and said to him, "Allah's Apostle has been delayed (there) and the time of
prayer is due. So will you lead the people in prayer?" Abu Bakr said, "Yes, if
you wish." Bilal pronounced the Iqama and Abu Bakr, went forward and said
Takbir for the people. In the mean-time Allah's Apostle came crossing the
rows (of the praying people) and stood in the (first) row and the people
started clapping. Abu Bakr, would never glance side-ways in his prayer but
when the people clapped much he looked back and (saw) Allah's Apostle .
Allah's Apostle beckoned him to carry on the prayer. Abu Bakr raised his
hands and thanked Allah, and retreated till he reached the (first) row. Allah's
Apostle went forward and led the people in the prayer. When he completed
the prayer he faced the people and said, "O people! Why did you start
clapping when something unusual happened to you in the prayer? Clapping
is only for women. So whoever amongst you comes across something in the
prayer should say, 'Subhan-Allah' for there is none who will not turn round
on hearing him saying Subhan-Allah. O Ab-u Bakr! What prevented you from
leading the people in the prayer when I beckoned you to do so?" Abu Bakr
replied, "How dare the son of Abu Quhafa lead the prayer in the presence of
Allah's Apostle ?"

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 327:
Narrated Asma':
I went to 'Aisha and she was standing praying and the people, too, were
standing (praying). So I said, "What is the matter with the people?" She
beckoned with her head towards the sky.
I said, "(Is there) a sign?" She nodded intending to say, "Yes."

Volume 2, Book 22, Number 328:
Narrated 'Aisha the wife of the Prophet:
Allah's Apostle during his illness prayed in his house sitting, whereas some
people followed him standing, but the Prophet beckoned them to sit down.
On completion of the prayer he said, "The Imam is to be followed. So, bow
when he bows, and raise your head when he raises his head." (See Hadith
No. 657 Vol 1 for taking the verdict).
BOOK 23. FUNERALS (AL-JANAA'IZ) (329-483)
Volume 2, Book 23, Number 329:
Narrated Abu Dhar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Someone came to me from my Lord and gave me the
news (or good tidings) that if any of my followers dies worshipping none (in
any way) along with Allah, he will enter Paradise." I asked, "Even if he
committed illegal sexual intercourse (adultery) and theft?" He replied, "Even
if he committed illegal sexual intercourse (adultery) and theft."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 330:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "Anyone who dies worshipping others along with Allah
will definitely enter the Fire." I said, "Anyone who dies worshipping none
along with Allah will definitely enter Paradise."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 331:
Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib:
Allah's Apostle ordered us to do seven things and forbade us to do other
seven. He ordered us:
to follow the funeral procession. to visit the sick, to accept invitations, to
help the oppressed, to fulfill the oaths, to return the greeting and to reply to
the sneezer: (saying, "May Allah be merciful on you," provided the sneezer
says, "All the praises are for Allah,"). He forbade us to use silver utensils and
dishes and to wear golden rings, silk (clothes), Dibaj (pure silk cloth), Qissi
and Istabraq (two kinds of silk cloths).

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 332:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "The rights of a Muslim on the Muslims are to
follow the funeral processions, to accept invitation and to reply the sneezer.
(see Hadith No 331)

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 333:
Narrated 'Aisha :
Abu Bakr came riding his horse from his dwelling place in As-Sunh. He got
down from it, entered the Mosque and did not speak with anybody till he
came to me and went direct to the Prophet, who was covered with a
marked blanket. Abu Bakr uncovered his face. He knelt down and kissed him
and then started weeping and said, "My father and my mother be sacrificed
for you, O Allah's Prophet! Allah will not combine two deaths on you. You
have died the death which was written for you."
Narrated Abu Salama from Ibn Abbas : Abu Bakr came out and 'Umar , was
addressing the people, and Abu Bakr told him to sit down but 'Umar
refused. Abu Bakr again told him to sit down but 'Umar again refused. Then
Abu Bakr recited the Tashah-hud (i.e. none has the right to be worshipped
but Allah and Muhammad is Allah's Apostle) and the people attended to
Abu Bakr and left 'Umar. Abu Bakr said, "Amma ba'du, whoever amongst
you worshipped Muhammad, then Muhammad is dead, but whoever
worshipped Allah, Allah is alive and will never die. Allah said: 'Muhammad is
no more than an Apostle and indeed (many) Apostles have passed away
before him ..(up to the) grateful.' " (3.144) (The narrator added, "By Allah, it
was as if the people never knew that Allah had revealed this verse before till
Abu Bakr recited it and then whoever heard it, started reciting it ")

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 334:
Narrated Kharija bin Zaid bin Thabit:
Um Al-'Ala', an Ansari woman who gave the pledge of allegiance to the
Prophet said to me, "The emigrants were distributed amongst us by drawing
lots and we got in our share 'Uthman bin Maz'un. We made him stay with us
in our house. Then he suffered from a disease which proved fatal when he
died and was given a bath and was shrouded in his clothes, Allah's Apostle
came I said, 'May Allah be merciful to you, O Abu As-Sa'ib! I testify that Allah
has honored you'. The Prophet said, 'How do you know that Allah has
honored him?' I replied, 'O Allah's Apostle! Let my father be sacrificed for
you! On whom else shall Allah bestow His honor?' The Prophet said, 'No
doubt, death came to him. By Allah, I too wish him good, but by Allah, I do
not know what Allah will do with me though I am Al lah's Apostle. ' By Allah,
I never attested the piety of anyone after that."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 335:
Narrated Al-Laith:
Um Al-'Ala', an Ansari woman who gave the pledge of allegiance to the
Prophet said to me, "The emigrants were distributed amongst us by drawing
lots and we got in our share 'Uthman bin Maz'un. We made him stay with us
in our house. Then he suffered from a disease which proved fatal when he
died and was given a bath and was shrouded in his clothes, Allah's Apostle
came I said, 'May Allah be merciful to you, O Abu As-Sa'ib! I testify that Allah
has honored you'. The Prophet said, 'How do you know that Allah has
honored him?' I replied, 'O Allah's Apostle! Let my father be sacrificed for
you! On whom else shall Allah bestow His honor?' The Prophet said, 'No
doubt, death came to him. By Allah, I too wish him good, but by Allah, I do
not know what Allah will do with me though I am Al lah's Apostle. ' By Allah,
I never attested the piety of anyone after that."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 336:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :
When my father was martyred, I lifted the sheet from his face and wept and
the people forbade me to do so but the Prophet did not forbid me. Then my
aunt Fatima began weeping and the Prophet said, "It is all the same whether
you weep or not. The angels were shading him continuously with their wings
till you shifted him (from the field). "

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 337:
Narrated Abu Huraira,
Allah's Apostle informed (the people) about the death of An-Najashi on the
very day he died. He went towards the Musalla (praying place) and the
people stood behind him in rows. He said four Takbirs (i.e. offered the
Funeral prayer).
Volume 2, Book 23, Number 338:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "Zaid took over the flag and was martyred. Then it was
taken by Jafar who was martyred as well. Then 'Abdullah bin Rawaha took
the flag but he too was martyred and at that time the eyes of Allah's Apostle
were full of tears. Then Khalid bin Al-Walid took the flag without being
nominated as a chief (before hand) and was blessed with victory."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 339:
Narrated Ibn Abbas.
A person died and Allah's Apostle used to visit him. He died at night and (the
people) buried him at night. In the morning they informed the Prophet
(about his death). He said, "What prevented you from informing me?" They
replied, "It was night and it was a dark night and so we disliked to trouble
you." The Prophet went to his grave and offered the (funeral) prayer.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 340:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "A Muslim whose three children die before the age of
puberty will be granted Paradise by Allah due to his mercy for them."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 341:
Narrated Abu Sa'id:
The women requested the Prophet, "Please fix a day for us." So the Prophet
preached to them and said, "A woman whose three children died would be
screened from the Hell Fire by them," Hearing that, a woman asked, "If two
died?" The Prophet replied, "Even two (would screen her from the (Hell
Fire. " And Abu Huraira added, "Those children should be below the age of
puberty. "

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 342:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "No Muslim whose three children died will go to the Fire
except for Allah's oath (i.e. everyone has to pass over the bridge above the
lake of fire)."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 343:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet passed by a woman who was sitting and weeping beside a
grave and said to her, "Fear Allah and be patient."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 344:
Narrated Um 'Atiyya al-Ansariya:
Allah's Apostle came to us when his daughter died and said, "Wash her
thrice or five times or more, if you see it necessary, with water and Sidr and
then apply camphor or some camphor at the end; and when you finish,
notify me." So when we finished it, we informed him and he gave us his
waist-sheet and told us to shroud the dead body in it.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 345:
Narrated Um 'Atiyya
Allah's Apostle came to us and we were giving a bath to his (dead) daughter
and said, "Wash her three, five or more times with water and Sidr and
sprinkle camphor on her at the end; and when you finish, notify me." So
when we finished, we informed him and he gave us his waist-sheet and told
us to shroud her in it. Aiyub said that Hafsa narrated to him a narration
similar to that of Muhammad in which it was said that the bath was to be
given for an odd number of times, and the numbers 3, 5 or 7 were
mentioned. It was also said that they were to start with the right side and
with the parts which were washed in ablution, and that Um 'Atiyya also
mentioned, "We combed her hair and divided them in three braids."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 346:
Narrated Um 'Atiyya:
Allah's Apostle , concerning his (dead) daughter's bath, said, "Start with the
right side, and the parts which are washed in ablution."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 347:
Narrated Um 'Atiyya :
When we washed the deceased daughter of the Prophet, he said to us,
while we were washing her, "Start the bath from the right side and from the
parts which are washed in ablution."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 348:
Narrated Um 'Atiyya:
The daughter of the Prophet expired, and he said to us, "Wash her three or
five times, or more if you see it necessary, and when you finish, notify me."
So, (when we finished) we informed him and he unfastened his waist-sheet
and told us to shroud her in it.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 349:
Narrated Muhammad
Um 'Atiyya said, "One of the daughters of the Prophet died and he came out
and said, 'Wash her three or five times or more, if you think it necessary,
with water and Sidr, and last of all put camphor (or some camphor) and
when you finish, inform me.' " Um Atiyya added, "When we finished we
informed him and he gave us his waist-sheet and said, 'Shroud her in it.' "
And Um 'Atiyya (in another narration) added, "The Prophet said, 'Wash her
three, five or seven times or more, if you think it necessary.' " Hafsa said
that Um 'Atiyya had also said, "We entwined her hair into three braids."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 350:
Narrated Hafsa bint Sirin:
Um 'Atiyya said that they had entwined the hair of the daughter of Allah's
Apostle in three braids. They first undid her hair, washed and then entwined
it in three braids."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 351:
Narrated Ibn Sirin:
Um 'Atiyya (an Ansari woman who gave the pledge of allegiance to the
Prophet ) came to Basra to visit her son, but she could not find him. She
narrated to us, "The Prophet came to us while we were giving bath to his
(dead) daughter, he said: 'Wash her three times, five times or more, if you
think it necessary, with water and Sidr, and last of all put camphor, and
when you finish, notify me.' " Um 'Atiyya added, "After finishing, we
informed him and he gave us his waist sheet and told us to shroud her in it
and did not say more than that."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 352:
Narrated Um 'Atiyya:
We entwined the hair of the dead daughter of the Prophet into three braids.
Waki said that Sufyan said, "One braid was entwined in front and the other
two were entwined on the sides of the head."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 353:
Narrated Um 'Atiyya:
One of the daughters of the Prophet expired and he came to us and said,
"Wash her with Sidr (water) for odd number of times, i.e. three, five or
more, if you think it necessary, and in the last, put camphor or (some
camphor on her), and when you finish, notify me." So when we finished we
informed him. He gave his waist-sheet to us (to shroud her). We entwined
the hair (of the deceased girl) in three braids and made them fall at her back.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 354:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle was shrouded in three Yemenite white Suhuliya (pieces of
cloth) of cotton, and in them there was neither a shirt nor a turban."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 355:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
While a man was riding (his Mount) in 'Arafat, he fell down from it (his
Mount) and broke his neck (and died). The Prophet said, "Wash him with
water and Sidr and shroud him in two pieces of cloth, and neither perfume
him, nor cover his head, for he will be resurrected on the Day of
Resurrection saying, 'Labbaik,' (i.e. like a pilgrim)."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 356:
Narrated Ibn Abbas
While a man was at 'Arafat (for Hajj) with Allah's Apostle the fell down from
his Mount and broke his neck (and died). So Allah's Apostle said, "Wash him
with water and Sidr and shroud him in two pieces of cloth and neither
perfume him nor cover his head, for Allah will resurrect him on the Day of
Resurrection and he will be saying 'Labbaik."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 357:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
A man was killed by his camel while we were with the Prophet and he was a
Muhrim. So the Prophet said, "Wash him with water and Sidr and shroud
him in two pieces of cloth and neither perfume him nor cover his head, for
Allah will resurrect him on the Day of Resurrection and he will be saying
'Labbaik' . "

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 358:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
A man fell from his Mount and died while he was with the Prophet at
'Arafat. The Prophet said, "Wash him with water and Sidr and shroud him in
two pieces of cloth and neither perfume him nor cover his head, for he will
be resurrected on the Day of Resurrection saying, 'Labbaik'."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 359:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
When 'Abdullah bin Ubai (the chief of hypocrites) died, his son came to the
Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Please give me your shirt to shroud
him in it, offer his funeral prayer and ask for Allah's forgiveness for him." So
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) gave his shirt to him and said, "Inform me (When
the funeral is ready) so that I may offer the funeral prayer." So, he informed
him and when the Prophet intended to offer the funeral prayer, 'Umar took
hold of his hand and said, "Has Allah not forbidden you to offer the funeral
prayer for the hypocrites? The Prophet said, "I have been given the choice
for Allah says: '(It does not avail) Whether you (O Muhammad) ask
forgiveness for them (hypocrites), or do not ask for forgiveness for them.
Even though you ask for their forgiveness seventy times, Allah will not
forgive them. (9.80)" So the Prophet offered the funeral prayer and on that
the revelation came: "And never (O Muhammad) pray (funeral prayer) for
any of them (i.e. hypocrites) that dies." (9. 84)

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 360:
Narrated Jabir:
The Prophet came to (the grave of) 'Abdullah bin Ubai after his body was
buried. The body was brought out and then the Prophet put his saliva over
the body and clothed it in his shirt.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 361:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet was shrouded in three pieces of cloth which were made of
Suhul (a type of cotton), and neither a shirt nor a turban were used.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 362:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle was shrouded in three pieces of cloth and neither a shirt nor
a turban were used.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 363:
Narrated Aisha:
Allah's Apostle was shrouded in three pieces of cloth which were made of
white Suhul and neither a shirt nor a turban were used.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 364:
Narrated Sad from his father:
Once the meal of 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf was brought in front of him, and
he said, "Mustab bin 'Umar was martyred and he was better than I, and he
had nothing except his Burd (a black square narrow dress) to be shrouded
in. Hamza or another person was martyred and he was also better than I and
he had nothing to be shrouded in except his Burd. No doubt, I fear that the
rewards of my deeds might have been given early in this world." Then he
started weeping.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 365:
Narrated Ibrahim:
Once a meal was brought to 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf and he was fasting. He
said, "Mustab bin 'Umar was martyred and he was better than I and was
shrouded in his Burd and when his head was covered with it, his legs
became bare, and when his legs were covered his head got uncovered.
Hamza was martyred and was better than I. Now the worldly wealth have
been bestowed upon us (or said a similar thing). No doubt, I fear that the
rewards of my deeds might have been given earlier in this world." Then he
started weeping and left his food.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 366:
Narrated Khabbab:
We emigrated with the Prophet (p.b.u.h) in Allah's cause, and so our reward
was then surely incumbent on Allah. Some of us died and they did not take
anything from their rewards in this world, and amongst them was Mustab
bin 'Umar; and the others were those who got their rewards. Mustab bin
'Umar was martyred on the day of the Battle of Uhud and we could get
nothing except his Burd to shroud him in. And when we covered his head his
feet became bare and vice versa. So the Prophet ordered us to cover his
head only and to put idhkhir (a kind of shrub) over his feet.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 367:
Narrated Sahl:
A woman brought a woven Burda (sheet) having edging (border) to the
Prophet, Then Sahl asked them whether they knew what is Burda, they said
that Burda is a cloak and Sahl confirmed their reply. Then the woman said, "I
have woven it with my own hands and I have brought it so that you may
wear it." The Prophet accepted it, and at that time he was in need of it. So
he came out wearing it as his waist-sheet. A man praised it and said, "Will
you give it to me? How nice it is!" The other people said, "You have not done
the right thing as the Prophet is in need of it and you have asked for it when
you know that he never turns down anybody's request." The man replied,
"By Allah, I have not asked for it to wear it but to make it my shroud." Later
it was his shroud.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 368:
Narrated Um 'Atiyya:
We were forbidden to accompany funeral processions but not strictly.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 369:
Narrated Muhammad bin Sirin:
One of the sons of Um 'Atiyya died, and when it was the third day she asked
for a yellow perfume and put it over her body, and said, "We were forbidden
to mourn for more than three days except for our husbands."
Volume 2, Book 23, Number 370:
Narrated Zainab bint Abi Salama:
When the news of the death of Abu Sufyan reached from Sham, Um Habiba
on the third day, asked for a yellow perfume and scented her cheeks and
forearms and said, "No doubt, I would not have been in need of this, had I
not heard the Prophet saying: "It is not legal for a woman who believes in
Allah and the Last Day to mourn for more than three days for any dead
person except her husband, for whom she should mourn for four months
and ten days."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 371:
Narrated Zainab bint Abi Salama :
I went to Um Habiba, the wife of Prophet, who said, "I heard the Prophets
saying, 'It is not legal for a woman who believes in Allah and the Last Day to
mourn for any dead person for more than three days except for her
husband, (for whom she should mourn) for four months and ten days'."
Later I went to Zainab bint Jahsh when her brother died; she asked for some
scent, and after using it she said, "I am not in need of scent but I heard
Allah's Apostle saying, 'It is not legal for a woman who believes in Allah and
the Last Day to mourn for more than three days for any dead person except
her husband, (for whom she should mourn) for four months and ten days.' "

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 372:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet passed by a woman who was weeping beside a grave. He told
her to fear Allah and be patient. She said to him, "Go away, for you have not
been afflicted with a calamity like mine." And she did not recognize him.
Then she was informed that he was the Prophet . so she went to the house
of the Prophet and there she did not find any guard. Then she said to him, "I
did not recognize you." He said, "Verily, the patience is at the first stroke of
a calamity."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 373:
Narrated Usama bin Zaid:
The daughter of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) sent (a messenger) to the Prophet
requesting him to come as her child was dying (or was gasping), but the
Prophet returned the messenger and told him to convey his greeting to her
and say: "Whatever Allah takes is for Him and whatever He gives, is for Him,
and everything with Him has a limited fixed term (in this world) and so she
should be patient and hope for Allah's reward." She again sent for him,
swearing that he should come. The Prophet got up, and so did Sad bin
'Ubada, Muadh bin Jabal, Ubai bin Ka'b, Zaid bin Thabit and some other
men. The child was brought to Allah's Apostle while his breath was
disturbed in his chest (the sub-narrator thinks that Usama added: ) as if it
was a leather water-skin. On that the eyes of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) started
shedding tears. Sad said, "O Allah's Apostle! What is this?" He replied, "It is
mercy which Allah has lodged in the hearts of His slaves, and Allah is
merciful only to those of His slaves who are merciful (to others).

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 374:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
We were (in the funeral procession) of one of the daughters of the Prophet
and he was sitting by the side of the grave. I saw his eyes shedding tears. He
said, "Is there anyone among you who did not have sexual relations with his
wife last night?" Abu Talha replied in the affirmative. And so the Prophet
told him to get down in the grave. And so he got down in her grave.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 375:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Ubaidullah bin Abi Mulaika:
One of the daughters of 'Uthman died at Mecca. We went to attend her
funeral procession. Ibn 'Umar and Ibn Abbas were also present. I sat in
between them (or said, I sat beside one of them. Then a man came and sat
beside me.) 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said to 'Amr bin 'Uthman, "Will you not
prohibit crying as Allah's Apostle has said, 'The dead person is tortured by
the crying of his relatives.?" Ibn Abbas said, "Umar used to say so." Then he
added narrating, "I accompanied Umar on a journey from Mecca till we
reached Al-Baida. There he saw some travelers in the shade of a Samura (A
kind of forest tree). He said (to me), "Go and see who those travelers are."
So I went and saw that one of them was Suhaib. I told this to 'Umar who
then asked me to call him. So I went back to Suhaib and said to him, "Depart
and follow the chief of the faithful believers." Later, when 'Umar was
stabbed, Suhaib came in weeping and saying, "O my brother, O my friend!"
(on this 'Umar said to him, "O Suhaib! Are you weeping for me while the
Prophet said, "The dead person is punished by some of the weeping of his
relatives?" Ibn Abbas added, "When 'Umar died I told all this to Aisha and
she said, 'May Allah be merciful to Umar. By Allah, Allah's Apostle did not
say that a believer is punished by the weeping of his relatives. But he said,
Allah increases the punishment of a non-believer because of the weeping of
his relatives." Aisha further added, "The Quran is sufficient for you (to clear
up this point) as Allah has stated: 'No burdened soul will bear another's
burden.' " (35.18). Ibn Abbas then said, "Only Allah makes one laugh or cry."
Ibn Umar did not say anything after that.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 376:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) Once Allah's Apostle passed by (the grave of) a
Jewess whose relatives were weeping over her. He said, "They are weeping
over her and she is being tortured in her grave."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 377:
Narrated Abu Burda:
That his father said, "When Umar was stabbed, Suhaib started crying: O my
brother! 'Umar said, 'Don't you know that the Prophet said: The deceased is
tortured for the weeping of the living'?"

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 378:
Narrated Al-Mughira:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Ascribing false things to me is not like ascribing
false things to anyone else. Whosoever tells a lie against me intentionally
then surely let him occupy his seat in Hell-Fire." I heard the Prophet saying,
"The deceased who is wailed over is tortured for that wailing."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 379:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar from his father:
The Prophet said, "The deceased is tortured in his grave for the wailing done
over him."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 380:
Narrated Shu'ba:
The deceased is tortured for the wailing of the living ones over him .

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 381:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :
On the day of the Battle of Uhud, my father was brought and he had been
mayhemed and was placed in front of Allah's Apostle and a sheet was over
him. I went intending to uncover my father but my people forbade me;
again I wanted to uncover him but my people forbade me. Allah's Apostle
gave his order and he was shifted away. At that time he heard the voice of a
crying woman and asked, "Who is this?" They said, "It is the daughter or the
sister of Amr." He said, "Why does she weep? (or let her stop weeping), for
the angels had been shading him with their wings till he (i.e. the body of the
martyr) was shifted away."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 382:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
the Prophet said, "He who slaps his cheeks, tears his clothes and follows the
ways and traditions of the Days of Ignorance is not one of us."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 383:
Narrated 'Amir bin Sad bin Abi Waqqas:
That his father said, "In the year of the last Hajj of the Prophet I became
seriously ill and the Prophet used to visit me inquiring about my health. I told
him, 'I am reduced to this state because of illness and I am wealthy and have
no inheritors except a daughter, (In this narration the name of 'Amir bin Sad
is mentioned and in fact it is a mistake; the narrator is 'Aisha bint Sad bin Abi
Waqqas). Should I give two-thirds of my property in charity?' He said, 'No.' I
asked, 'Half?' He said, 'No.' then he added, 'One-third, and even one-third is
much. You'd better leave your inheritors wealthy rather than leaving them
poor, begging others. You will get a reward for whatever you spend for
Allah's sake, even for what you put in your wife's mouth.' I said, 'O Allah's
Apostle! Will I be left alone after my companions have gone?' He said, 'If you
are left behind, whatever good deeds you will do will up-grade you and raise
you high. And perhaps you will have a long life so that some people will be
benefited by you while others will be harmed by you. O Allah! Complete the
emigration of my companions and do not turn them renegades.' But Allah's
Apostle felt sorry for poor Sad bin Khaula as he died in Mecca." (but Sad bin
Abi Waqqas lived long after the Prophet (p.b.u.h).)
Volume 2, Book 23, Number 384:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "He who slaps the cheeks, tears the clothes and follows
the tradition of the Days of Ignorance is not from us."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 385:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "He who slaps the cheeks, tears the clothes and follows
the traditions of the Days of Ignorance is not from us."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 386:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When the Prophet got the news of the death of Ibn Haritha, Ja'far and Ibn
Rawaha he sat down and looked sad and I was looking at him through the
chink of the door. A man came and told him about the crying of the women
of Ja'far. The Prophet ordered him to forbid them. The man went and came
back saying that he had told them but they did not listen to him. The
Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Forbid them." So again he went and came back for
the third time and said, "O Allah's Apostle! By Allah, they did not listen to us
at all." ('Aisha added): Allah's Apostle ordered him to go and put dust in
their mouths. I said, (to that man) "May Allah stick your nose in the dust (i.e.
humiliate you)! You could neither (persuade the women to) fulfill the order
of Allah's Apostle nor did you relieve Allah's Apostle from fatigue. "

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 387:
Narrated Anas:
When the reciters of Quran were martyred, Allah's Apostle recited Qunut for
one month and I never saw him (i.e. Allah's Apostle) so sad as he was on
that day.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 388:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
One of the sons of Abu Talha became sick and died and Abu Talha at that
time was not at home. When his wife saw that he was dead, she prepared
him (washed and shrouded him) and placed him somewhere in the house.
When Abu Talha came, he asked, "How is the boy?" She said, "The child is
quiet and I hope he is in peace." Abu Talha thought that she had spoken the
truth. Abu Talha passed the night and in the morning took a bath and when
he intended to go out, she told him that his son had died, Abu Talha offered
the (morning) prayer with the Prophet and informed the Prophet of what
happened to them. Allah's Apostle said, "May Allah bless you concerning
your night. (That is, may Allah bless you with good offspring)." Sufyan said,
"One of the Ansar said, 'They (i.e. Abu Talha and his wife) had nine sons and
all of them became reciters of the Quran (by heart).' "

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 389:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "The real patience is at the first stroke of a calamity."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 390:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
We went with Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) to the blacksmith Abu Saif, and he
was the husband of the wet-nurse of Ibrahim (the son of the Prophet).
Allah's Apostle took Ibrahim and kissed him and smelled him and later we
entered Abu Saif's house and at that time Ibrahim was in his last breaths,
and the eyes of Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) started shedding tears. 'Abdur
Rahman bin 'Auf said, "O Allah's Apostle, even you are weeping!" He said,
"O Ibn 'Auf, this is mercy." Then he wept more and said, "The eyes are
shedding tears and the heart is grieved, and we will not say except what
pleases our Lord, O Ibrahim ! Indeed we are grieved by your separation."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 391:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar :
Sad bin 'Ubada became sick and the Prophet along with 'Abdur Rahman bin
'Auf, Sad bin Abi Waqqas and 'Abdullah bin Masud visited him to enquire
about his health. When he came to him, he found him surrounded by his
household and he asked, "Has he died?" They said, "No, O Allah's Apostle."
The Prophet wept and when the people saw the weeping of Allah's Apostle
(p.b.u.h) they all wept. He said, "Will you listen? Allah does not punish for
shedding tears, nor for the grief of the heart but he punishes or bestows His
Mercy because of this." He pointed to his tongue and added, "The deceased
is punished for the wailing of his relatives over him." 'Umar used to beat
with a stick and throw stones and put dust over the faces (of those who
used to wail over the dead).

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 392:
Narrated Aisha:
When the news of the martyrdom of Zaid bin Haritha, Ja'far and 'Abdullah
bin Rawaha came, the Prophet sat down looking sad, and I was looking
through the chink of the door. A man came and said, "O Allah's Apostle! The
women of Ja'far," and then he mentioned their crying . The Prophet
(p.b.u.h) ordered h im to stop them from crying. The man went and came
back and said, "I tried to stop them but they disobeyed." The Prophet
(p.b.u.h) ordered him for the second time to forbid them. He went again and
came back and said, "They did not listen to me, (or "us": the sub-narrator
Muhammad bin Haushab is in doubt as to which is right). " ('Aisha added:
The Prophet said, "Put dust in their mouths." I said (to that man), "May Allah
stick your nose in the dust (i.e. humiliate you)." By Allah, you could not (stop
the women from crying) to fulfill the order, besides you did not relieve
Allah's Apostle from fatigue."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 393:
Narrated Um 'Atiyya:
At the time of giving the pledge of allegiance to the Prophet one of the
conditions was that we would not wail, but it was not fulfilled except by five
women and they are Um Sulaim, Um Al-'Ala', the daughter of Abi Sabra (the
wife of Muadh), and two other women; or the daughter of Abi Sabra and
the wife of Muadh and another woman.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 394:
Narrated 'Amir bin Rabi'a:,
The Prophet said, "Whenever you see a funeral procession, stand up till the
procession goes ahead of you." Al-Humaidi added, "Till the coffin leaves you
behind or is put down."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 395:
Narrated 'Amir bin Rabi'a:
The Prophet said, "If any one of you see a funeral procession and he is not
going along with it, then he should stand and remain standing till he gets
behind it, or it leaves him behind, or the coffin is put down before it goes
ahead of him . "

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 396:
Narrated Said Al-Maqburi
That his father said, "While we were accompanying a funeral procession,
Abu Huraira got hold of the hand of Marwan and they sat down before the
coffin was put down. Then Abu Said came and took hold of Marwan's hand
and said, "Get up. By Allah, no doubt this (i.e. Abu Huraira) knows that the
Prophet forbade us to do that." Abu Huraira said, "He (Abu Said) has spoken
the truth."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 397:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri
The Prophet said, "When you see a funeral procession, you should stand up,
and whoever accompanies it should not sit till the coffin is put down."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 398:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :
A funeral procession passed in front of us and the Prophet stood up and we
too stood up. We said, 'O Allah's Apostle! This is the funeral procession of a
Jew." He said, "Whenever you see a funeral procession, you should stand
up."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 399:
Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin Abi Laila:
Sahl bin Hunaif and Qais bin Sad were sitting in the city of Al-Qadisiya. A
funeral procession passed in front of them and they stood up. They were
told that funeral procession was of one of the inhabitants of the land i.e. of
a non-believer, under the protection of Muslims. They said, "A funeral
procession passed in front of the Prophet and he stood up. When he was
told that it was the coffin of a Jew, he said, "Is it not a living being (soul)?"
Volume 2, Book 23, Number 400:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri :
Allah's Apostle said, When the funeral is ready and the men carry it on their
shoulders, if the deceased was righteous it will say, 'Present me (hurriedly),'
and if he was not righteous, it will say, 'Woe to it (me)! Where are they
taking it (me)?' Its voice is heard by everything except man and if he heard it
he would fall unconscious."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 401:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Hurry up with the dead body for if it was righteous, you
are forwarding it to welfare; and if it was otherwise, then you are putting off
an evil thing down your necks."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 402:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri
The Prophet said, "When a funeral is ready and the men carry the deceased
on their necks (shoulders), if it was pious then it will say, 'Present me
quickly', and if it was not pious, then it will say, 'Woe to it (me), where are
they taking it (me)?' And its voice is heard by everything except mankind
and if he heard it he would fall unconscious."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 403:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle offered the funeral prayer for An-Najashi and I was in the
second or third row.
Volume 2, Book 23, Number 404:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) informed his companions about the death of
AnNajashi and then he went ahead (to lead the prayer) and the people lined
up behind him in rows and he said four Takbir.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 405:
Narrated Ash-Shaibani:
Ash Sha'bi said, "I was informed by a man who had seen the Prophet going
to a grave that was separate from the other graves and he aligned the
people in rows and said four Takbir." I said, "O Abu 'Amr! who narrated
(that) to you"? He said, "Ibn Abbas. "

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 406:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :
The Prophet said, "Today a pious man from Ethiopia (i.e. An Najashi) has
expired, come on to offer the funeral prayer." (Jabir said): We lined up in
rows and after that the Prophet led the prayer and we were in rows. Jabir
added, I was in the second row."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 407:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Allah's Apostle passed by a grave of a deceased who had been buried at
night. He said, "When was this (deceased) buried?" The people said,
"Yesterday." He said, "Why did you not inform me?" They said, "We buried
him when it was dark and so we disliked to wake you up." He stood up and
we lined up behind him. (Ibn Abbas said): I was one of them, and the
Prophet offered the funeral prayer.
Volume 2, Book 23, Number 408:
Narrated Ash-Shaibani:
Ash-Sha'bi said, "Somebody who passed along with your Prophet (p.b.u.h)
by a grave that was separate from the other graves informed me (saying),
"The Prophet
led us (in the prayer) and we aligned behind him." We said, "O Abu 'Amr!
Who told you this narration?" He replied, "Ibn Abbas."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 409:
Narrated Nafi:
Ibn Umar was told that Abu Huraira said, "Whoever accompanies the funeral
procession will have a reward equal to one Qirat." Ibn 'Umar said, "Abu
Huraira talks of a too enormous reward." Aisha attested Abu Huraira's
narration and said, "I heard Allah's Apostle saying like that." Ibn Umar said,
"We have lost numerous Qirats."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 410:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
that Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "Whoever attends the funeral procession
till he offers the funeral prayer for it, will get a reward equal to one Qirat,
and whoever accompanies it till burial, will get a reward equal to two
Qirats." It was asked, "What are two Qirats?" He replied, "Like two huge
mountains."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 411:
Narrated 'Amir:
Ibn Abbas (who was at that time a boy) said, "Allah's Apostle came to a
grave and the people said, 'He or she was buried yesterday.' " Ibn Abbas
added, "We aligned behind the Prophet and he led the funeral prayer of the
deceased."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 412:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle informed about the news of the death of An-Najash (King of
Ethiopia) on the day he expired. He said, "Ask Allah's forgiveness for your
brother. " Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet made them align in rows at
the Musalla and said four Takbir.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 413:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar :
The Jew brought to the Prophet a man and a woman from amongst them
who have committed (adultery) illegal sexual intercourse. He ordered both
of them to be stoned (to death), near the place of offering the funeral
prayers beside the mosque."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 414:
Narrated 'Urwa:
Aisha said, "The Prophet in his fatal illness said, 'Allah cursed the Jews and
the Christians because they took the graves of their Prophets as places for
praying."' Aisha added, "Had it not been for that the grave of the Prophet
(p.b.u.h)
would have been made prominent but I am afraid it might be taken (as a)
place for praying.
Volume 2, Book 23, Number 415:
Narrated Samura bin Jundab:
I offered the funeral prayer behind the Prophet for a woman who had died
during child-birth and he stood up by the middle of the coffin.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 416:
Narrated Samura bin Jundab
I offered the funeral prayer behind the Prophet for a woman who had died
during child-birth and he stood up by the middle of the coffin.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 417:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle informed about the news of the death of An-Najash on the
day he died. He went out with us to the Musalla and we aligned in rows and
he said four Takbirs for An-Najashi's funeral prayer.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 418:
Narrated Jabir:
The Prophet offered the funeral prayer of As-Hama An-Najash and said four
Takbir.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 419:
Narrated Talha bin 'Abdullah bin 'Auf:
I offered the funeral prayer behind Ibn Abbas and he recited Al-Fatiha and
said, "You should know that it (i.e. recitation of Al-Fatiha) is the tradition of
the Prophet Muhammad.
Volume 2, Book 23, Number 420:
Narrated Sulaiman Ash-Shaibani:
I heard Ash-Sha'bi saying, "I was told by a man who had passed with the
Prophet (p.b.u.h) by a grave that was separate from the other graves that
he (the Prophet ) led them in the prayer and they prayed behind him." I said,
"O Abu 'Amr! Who narrated that to you?" He replied, "Ibn Abbas."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 421:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A black person, a male or a female used to clean the Mosque and then died.
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) did not know about it . One day the Prophet
remembered him and said, "What happened to that person?" The people
replied, "O Allah's Apostle! He died." He said, "Why did you not inform me?"
They said, "His story was so and so (i.e. regarded him as insignificant)." He
said, "Show me his grave." He then went to his grave and offered the
funeral prayer.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 422:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "When a human being is laid in his grave and his
companions return and he even hears their foot steps, two angels come to
him and make him sit and ask him: What did you use to say about this man,
Muhammad ? He will say: I testify that he is Allah's slave and His Apostle.
Then it will be said to him, 'Look at your place in the Hell-Fire. Allah has given
you a place in Paradise instead of it.' " The Prophet added, "The dead person
will see both his places. But a non-believer or a hypocrite will say to the
angels, 'I do not know, but I used to say what the people used to say! It will
be said to him, 'Neither did you know nor did you take the guidance (by
reciting the Quran).' Then he will be hit with an iron hammer between his
two ears, and he will cry and that cry will be heard by whatever approaches
him except human beings and jinns."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 423:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The angel of death was sent to Moses and when he went to him, Moses
slapped him severely, spoiling one of his eyes. The angel went back to his
Lord, and said, "You sent me to a slave who does not want to die." Allah
restored his eye and said, "Go back and tell him (i.e. Moses) to place his
hand over the back of an ox, for he will be allowed to live for a number of
years equal to the number of hairs coming under his hand." (So the angel
came to him and told him the same). Then Moses asked, "O my Lord! What
will be then?" He said, "Death will be then." He said, "(Let it be) now." He
asked Allah that He bring him near the Sacred Land at a distance of a stone's
throw. Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "Were I there I would show you the
grave of Moses by the way near the red sand hill."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 424:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) offered the funeral prayer of a man one night after he
was buried, he and his companions stood up (for the Prayer). He had asked
them about him before standing, saying, "Who is this?" They said, "He is so
and so and was buried last night." So all of them offered the funeral prayer.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 425:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When the Prophet became ill, some of his wives talked about a church which
they had seen in Ethiopia and it was called Mariya. Um Salma and Um Habiba
had been to Ethiopia, and both of them narrated its (the Church's) beauty
and the pictures it contained. The Prophet raised his head and said, "Those
are the people who, whenever a pious man dies amongst them, make a
place of worship at his grave and then they make those pictures in it. Those
are the worst creatures in the Sight of Allah."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 426:
Narrated Anas:
We were in the funeral procession of the daughter of Allah's Apostle and
Allah's Apostle was sitting near the grave and I saw his eyes full of tears. He
said, "Is there anyone amongst you who did not have sexual relations with
his wife last night?" Abu Talha replied in the affirmative. And so Allah's
Apostle told him to get down in her grave and he got down in her grave and
buried her.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 427:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
The Prophet collected every two martyrs of Uhud in one piece of cloth, then
he would ask, "Which of them had (knew) more of the Quran?" When one of
them was pointed out for him, he would put that one first in the grave and
say, "I will be a witness on these on the Day of Resurrection." He ordered
them to be buried with their blood on their bodies and they were neither
washed nor was a funeral prayer offered for them.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 428:
Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir:
One day the Prophet went out and offered the funeral prayers of the
martyrs of Uhud and then went up the pulpit and said, "I will pave the way
for you as your predecessor and will be a witness on you. By Allah! I see my
Fount (Kauthar) just now and I have been given the keys of all the treasures
of the earth (or the keys of the earth). By Allah! I am not afraid that you will
worship others along with Allah after my death, but I am afraid that you will
fight with one another for the worldly things."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 429:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :
The Prophet buried every two martyrs in of Uhud in one grave.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 430:
Narrated Jabir:
The Prophet said, "Bury them (i.e. martyrs) with their blood." (that was) On
the day of the Battle of Uhud. He did not get them washed.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 431:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :
Allah's Apostle shrouded every two martyrs of Uhud in one piece of cloth
and then he would ask, "Which of them knew more Quran?" When one of
them was pointed out he would put him first in the grave. He said, "I am a
witness on these." Then he ordered them to be buried with blood on their
bodies. Neither did he offer their funeral prayer nor did he get them
washed. (Jabir bin Abdullah added): Allah's Apostle used to ask about the
martyrs of Uhud as to which of them knew more of the Quran." And when
one of them was pointed out as having more of it he would put him first in
the grave and then his companions. (Jabir added): My father and my uncle
were shrouded in one sheet.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 432:
Narrated Ibn Abbas
The Prophet said, "Allah has made Mecca a sanctuary (sacred place) and it
was a sanctuary before me and will be so after me. It was made legal for me
(to fight in it) for a few hours of the day. None is allowed to uproot its
thorny shrubs or to cut its trees or to chase its game or to pick up its fallen
things except by a person who announces it publicly." On that Al-Abbas said
(to the Prophet), "Except Al-Idhkhir for our goldsmiths and for our graves."
And so the Prophet added, "Except Al-Idhkhir. " And Abu Huraira narrated
that the Prophet said, "Except Al-Idhkhir for our graves and houses." And
Ibn Abbas said, "For their goldsmiths and houses."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 433:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle came to Abdullah bin Ubai (a hypocrite) after his death and
he has been laid in his pit (grave). He ordered (that he be taken out of the
grave) and he was taken out. Then he placed him on his knees and threw
some of his saliva on him and clothed him in his (the Prophet's) own shirt.
Allah knows better (why he did so). 'Abdullah bin Ubai had given his shirt to
Al-Abbas to wear. Abu Harun said, "Allah's Apostle at that time had two
shirts and the son of 'Abdullah bin Ubai said to him, 'O Allah's Apostle!
Clothe my father in your shirt which has been in contact with your skin.' '
Sufyan added, "Thus people think that the Prophet clothed 'Abdullah bin
Tubal in his shirt in lieu of what he (Abdullah) had done (for Al Abbas, the
Prophet's uncle.)"

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 434:
Narrated Jabir:
When the time of the Battle of Uhud approached, my father called me at
night and said, "I think that I will be the first amongst the companions of the
Prophet to be martyred. I do not leave anyone after me dearer to me than
you, except Allah's Apostle's soul and I owe some debt and you should
repay it and treat your sisters favorably (nicely and politely)." So in the
morning he was the first to be martyred and was buried along with another
(martyr). I did not like to leave him with the other (martyr) so I took him out
of the grave after six months of his burial and he was in the same condition
as he was on the day of burial, except a slight change near his ear.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 435:
Narrated Jabir:
A man was buried along with my father and I did not like it till I took him (i.e.
my father) out and buried him in a separate grave.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 436:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet collected every two martyrs of Uhud (in one grave) and then he
would ask, "Which of them knew the Quran more?" And if one of them was
pointed out for him as having more knowledge, he would put him first in the
Lahd. The Prophet said, "I will be a witness on these on the Day of
Resurrection." Then he ordered them to be buried with their blood on their
bodies and he did not have them washed.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 437:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
'Umar set out along with the Prophet (p.b.u.h) with a group of people to Ibn
Saiyad till they saw him playing with the boys near the hillocks of Bani
Mughala. Ibn Saiyad at that time was nearing his puberty and did not notice
(us) until the Prophet stroked him with his hand and said to him, "Do you
testify that I am Allah's Apostle?" Ibn Saiyad looked at him and said, "I testify
that you are the Messenger of illiterates." Then Ibn Saiyad asked the
Prophet (p.b.u.h), "Do you testify that I am Allah's Apostle?" The Prophet
(p.b.u.h) refuted it and said, "I believe in Allah and His Apostles." Then he
said (to Ibn Saiyad), "What do you think?" Ibn Saiyad answered, "True
people and liars visit me." The Prophet said, "You have been confused as to
this matter." Then the Prophet said to him, "I have kept something (in my
mind) for you, (can you tell me that?)" Ibn Saiyad said, "It is Al-Dukh (the
smoke)." (2) The Prophet said, "Let you be in ignominy. You cannot cross
your limits." On that 'Umar, said, "O Allah's Apostle! Allow me to chop his
head off." The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "If he is he (i.e. Dajjal), then you
cannot over-power him, and if he is not, then there is no use of murdering
him." (Ibn 'Umar added): Later on Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) once again went
along with Ubai bin Ka'b to the date-palm trees (garden) where Ibn Saiyad
was staying. The Prophet (p.b.u.h) wanted to hear something from Ibn
Saiyad before Ibn Saiyad could see him, and the Prophet (p.b.u.h) saw him
lying covered with a sheet and from where his murmurs were heard. Ibn
Saiyad's mother saw Allah's Apostle while he was hiding himself behind the
trunks of the date-palm trees. She addressed Ibn Saiyad, "O Saf ! (and this
was the name of Ibn Saiyad) Here is Muhammad." And with that Ibn Saiyad
got up. The Prophet said, "Had this woman left him (Had she not disturbed
him), then Ibn Saiyad would have revealed the reality of his case.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 438:
Narrated Anas:
A young Jewish boy used to serve the Prophet and he became sick. So the
Prophet went to visit him. He sat near his head and asked him to embrace
Islam. The boy looked at his father, who was sitting there; the latter told him
to obey Abu-l-Qasim and the boy embraced Islam. The Prophet came out
saying: "Praises be to Allah Who saved the boy from the Hell-fire."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 439:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
My mother and I were among the weak and oppressed. I from among the
children, and my mother from among the women.
Volume 2, Book 23, Number 440:
Narrated Ibn Shihab:
The funeral prayer should be offered for every child even if he were the son
of a prostitute as he was born with a true faith of Islam (i.e. to worship none
but Allah Alone). If his parents are Muslims, particularly the father, even if
his mother were a non-Muslim, and if he after the delivery cries (even once)
before his death (i.e. born alive) then the funeral prayer must be offered.
And if the child does not cry after his delivery (i.e. born dead) then his
funeral prayer should not be offered, and he will be considered as a
miscarriage. Abu Huraira, narrated that the Prophet said, "Every child is born
with a true faith (i.e. to worship none but Allah Alone) but his parents
convert him to Judaism or to Christianity or to Magainism, as an animal
delivers a perfect baby animal. Do you find it mutilated?" Then Abu Huraira
recited the holy verses: 'The pure Allah's Islamic nature (true faith i.e. to
worship none but Allah Alone), with which He has created human beings.' "
(30.30).

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 441:
Narrated Abu Huraira :
Allah's Apostle said, "Every child is born with a true faith of Islam (i.e. to
worship none but Allah Alone) but his parents convert him to Judaism,
Christianity or Magainism, as an animal delivers a perfect baby animal. Do
you find it mutilated?" Then Abu Huraira recited the holy verses: "The pure
Allah's Islamic nature (true faith of Islam) (i.e. worshipping none but Allah)
with which He has created human beings. No change let there be in the
religion of Allah (i.e. joining none in worship with Allah). That is the straight
religion (Islam) but most of men know, not." (30.30)

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 442:
Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab from his father:
When the time of the death of Abu Talib approached, Allah's Apostle went
to him and found Abu Jahl bin Hisham and 'Abdullah bin Abi Umaiya bin AlMughira by his side. Allah's Apostle said to Abu Talib, "O uncle! Say: None
has the right to be worshipped but Allah, a sentence with which I shall be a
witness (i.e. argue) for you before Allah. Abu Jahl and 'Abdullah bin Abi
Umaiya said, "O Abu Talib! Are you going to denounce the religion of Abdul
Muttalib?" Allah's Apostle kept on inviting Abu Talib to say it (i.e. 'None has
the right to be worshipped but Allah') while they (Abu Jahl and Abdullah)
kept on repeating their statement till Abu Talib said as his last statement
that he was on the religion of Abdul Muttalib and refused to say, 'None has
the right to be worshipped but Allah.' (Then Allah's Apostle said, "I will keep
on asking Allah's forgiveness for you unless I am forbidden (by Allah) to do
so." So Allah revealed (the verse) concerning him (i.e. It is not fitting for the
Prophet and those who believe that they should invoke (Allah) for
forgiveness for pagans even though they be of kin, after it has become clear
to them that they are companions of the fire (9.113).

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 443:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet once passed by two graves, and those two persons (in the
graves) were being tortured. He said, "They are being tortured not for a
great thing (to avoid). One of them never saved himself from being soiled
with his urine, while the other was going about with calumnies (to make
enmity between friends). He then took a green leaf of a date-palm tree split
it into two pieces and fixed one on each grave. The people said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Why have you done so?" He replied, "I hope that their punishment
may be lessened till they (the leaf) become dry."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 444:
Narrated 'Ali:
" We were accompanying a funeral procession in Baqi-I-Gharqad. The
Prophet came to us and sat and we sat around him. He had a small stick in
his hand then he bent his head and started scraping the ground with it. He
then said, "There is none among you, and not a created soul, but has place
either in Paradise or in Hell assigned for him and it is also determined for him
whether he will be among the blessed or wretched." A man said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Should we not depend on what has been written for us and leave
the deeds as whoever amongst us is blessed will do the deeds of a blessed
person and whoever amongst us will be wretched, will do the deeds of a
wretched person?" The Prophet said, "The good deeds are made easy for
the blessed, and bad deeds are made easy for the wretched." Then he
recited the Verses:-- "As for him who gives (in charity) and is Allah-fearing
And believes in the Best reward from Allah. " (92.5-6)

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 445:
Narrated Thabit bin Ad-Dahhak:
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Whoever intentionally swears falsely by a
religion other than Islam, then he is what he has said, (e.g. if he says, 'If such
thing is not true then I am a Jew,' he is really a Jew). And whoever commits
suicide with piece of iron will be punished with the same piece of iron in the
Hell Fire." Narrated Jundab the Prophet said, "A man was inflicted with
wounds and he committed suicide, and so Allah said: My slave has caused
death on himself hurriedly, so I forbid Paradise for him."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 446:
Narrated Abu Huraira-:
The Prophet said, "He who commits suicide by throttling shall keep on
throttling himself in the Hell Fire (forever) and he who commits suicide by
stabbing himself shall keep on stabbing himself in the Hell-Fire."
Volume 2, Book 23, Number 447:
Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab :
When 'Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul died, Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) was called
upon to offer his funeral prayer. When Allah's Apostle stood up to offer the
prayer, I got up quickly and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Are you going to pray
for Ibn Ubai and he said so and so on such and such occasions?" And started
mentioning all that he had said. Allah's Apostle smiled and said, "O 'Umar!
Go away from me." When I talked too much he said, "I have been given the
choice and so I have chosen (to offer the prayer). Had I known that he
would be forgiven by asking for Allah's forgiveness for more than seventy
times, surely I would have done so." ('Umar added): Allah's Apostle offered
his funeral prayer and returned and after a short while the two verses of
Surat Bara' were revealed: i.e. "And never (O Muhammad) pray for any of
them who dies . . . (to the end of the verse) rebellion (9.84)" -- ('Umar
added), "Later I astonished at my daring before Allah's Apostle on that day.
And Allah and His Apostle know better."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 448:
Narrated Anas bin Malik, :
A funeral procession passed and the people praised the deceased. The
Prophet said, "It has been affirmed to him." Then another funeral
procession passed and the people spoke badly of the deceased. The Prophet
said, "It has been affirmed to him". 'Umar bin Al-Khattab asked (Allah's
Apostle (p.b.u.h) ), "What has been affirmed?" He replied, "You praised this,
so Paradise has been affirmed to him; and you spoke badly of this, so Hell
has been affirmed to him. You people are Allah's witnesses on earth."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 449:
Narrated Abu Al-Aswad:
I came to Medina when an epidemic had broken out. While I was sitting with
'Umar bin Al-Khattab a funeral procession passed by and the people praised
the deceased. 'Umar said, "It has been affirmed to him." And another
funeral procession passed by and the people praised the deceased. 'Umar
said, "It has been affirmed to him." A third (funeral procession) passed by
and the people spoke badly of the deceased. He said, "It has been affirmed
to him." I (Abu Al-Aswad) asked, "O chief of the believers! What has been
affirmed?" He replied, "I said the same as the Prophet had said, that is: if
four persons testify the piety of a Muslim, Allah will grant him Paradise." We
asked, "If three persons testify his piety?" He (the Prophet) replied, "Even
three." Then we asked, "If two?" He replied, "Even two." We did not ask him
regarding one witness.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 450:
Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib :
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "When a faithful believer is made to sit in his
grave, then (the angels) come to him and he testifies that none has the right
to be worshipped but Allah and Muhammad is Allah's Apostle. And that
corresponds to Allah's statement: Allah will keep firm those who believe
with the word that stands firm . . . (14.27).

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 451:
Narrated Shu'ba:
Same as above and added, "Allah will keep firm those who believe . . . (14.27)
was revealed concerning the punishment of the grave."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 452:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet looked at the people of the well (the well in which the bodies
of the pagans killed in the Battle of Badr were thrown) and said, "Have you
found true what your Lord promised you?" Somebody said to him, "You are
addressing dead people." He replied, "You do not hear better than they but
they cannot reply."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 453:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "They now realize that what I used to tell them was the
truth. "And Allah said, 'Verily! You cannot make the dead to hear (i.e. benefit
them, and similarly the disbelievers) nor can you make the deaf hear.
(27.80).

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 454:
Narrated Masruq:
'Aisha said that a Jewess came to her and mentioned the punishment in the
grave, saying to her, "May Allah protect you from the punishment of the
grave." 'Aisha then asked Allah's Apostle about the punishment of the
grave. He said, "Yes, (there is) punishment in the grave." 'Aisha added,
"After that I never saw Allah's Apostle but seeking refuge with Allah from
the punishment in the grave in every prayer he prayed."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 455:
Narrated Asma' bint Abi Bakr :
Allah's Apostle once stood up delivering a sermon and mentioned the trial
which people will face in the grave. When he mentioned that, the Muslims
started shouting loudly.
Volume 2, Book 23, Number 456:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "When (Allah's) slave is put in his grave and his
companions return and he even hears their footsteps, two angels come to
him and make him sit and ask, 'What did you use to say about this man (i.e.
Muhammad)?' The faithful Believer will say, 'I testify that he is Allah's slave
and His Apostle.' Then they will say to him, 'Look at your place in the Hell
Fire; Allah has given you a place in Paradise instead of it.' So he will see both
his places." (Qatada said, "We were informed that his grave would be made
spacious." Then Qatada went back to the narration of Anas who said;)
Whereas a hypocrite or a non-believer will be asked, "What did you use to
say about this man." He will reply, "I do not know; but I used to say what the
people used to say." So they will say to him, "Neither did you know nor did
you take the guidance (by reciting the Quran)." Then he will be hit with iron
hammers once, that he will send such a cry as everything near to him will
hear, except Jinns and human beings. (See Hadith No. 422).

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 457:
Narrated Abi Aiyub:
Once the Prophet went out after sunset and heard a dreadful voice, and
said, "The Jews are being punished in their graves."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 458:
Narrated Musa bin 'Uqba:
(From the daughter of Khalid bin Sa id bin Al-'Asi) who said that she had
heard the Prophet seeking refuge with Allah from the punishment in the
grave.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 459:
Narrated Abu Huraira :
Allah's Apostle used to invoke (Allah): "Allahumma ini a'udhu bika min
'adhabi-l-Qabr, wa min 'adhabi-nnar, wa min fitnati-l-mahya wa-lmamat, wa
min fitnati-l-masih ad-dajjal. (O Allah! I seek refuge with you from the
punishment in the grave and from the punishment in the Hell fire and from
the afflictions of life and death, and the afflictions of Al-Masih Ad-Dajjal."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 460:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet once passed by two graves and said, "They (the deceased
persons in those graves) are being tortured not for a great thing to avoid."
And then added, "Yes, (they are being punished for a big sin), for one of
them used to go about with calumnies while the other never saved himself
from being soiled with his urine." (Ibn Abbas added): Then he took a green
leaf of a date-palm) and split it into two pieces and fixed one piece on each
grave and said, "May their punishment be abated till these (two pieces) get
dry."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 461:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar :
Allah's Apostle said, "When anyone of you dies, he is shown his place both in
the morning and in the evening. If he is one of the people of Paradise; he is
shown his place in it, and if he is from the people of the Hell-Fire; he is
shown his place there-in. Then it is said to him, 'This is your place till Allah
resurrect you on the Day of Resurrection."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 462:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri :
Allah's Apostle said, "When the funeral is ready (for its burial) and the
people lift it on their shoulders, then if the deceased is a righteous person he
says, 'Take me ahead,' and if he is not a righteous one then he says, 'Woe to
it (me)! Where are you taking it (me)?' And his voice is audible to everything
except human beings; and if they heard it they would fall down unconscious
."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 463:
Narrated Anas bin Malik
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "Any Muslim whose three children died before
the age of puberty will be granted Paradise by Allah because of His mercy to
them."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 464:
Narrated Al-Bara':
When Ibrahim (the son of Prophet) expired, Allah's Apostle said, "There is a
wet-nurse for him in Paradise."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 465:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) was asked about the children of (Mushrikeen)
pagans. The Prophet replied, "Since Allah created them, He knows what sort
of deeds they would have done."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 466:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet was asked about the offspring of pagans (Mushrakeen); so he
said, "Allah knows what sort of deeds they would have done."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 467:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Every child is born with a true faith of Islam (i.e. to
worship none but Allah Alone) and his parents convert him to Judaism or
Christianity or Magianism, as an animal delivers a perfect baby animal. Do
you find it mutilated?"

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 468:
Narrated Samura bin Jundab:
Whenever the Prophet finished the (morning) prayer, he would face us and
ask, "Who amongst you had a dream last night?" So if anyone had seen a
dream he would narrate it. The Prophet would say: "Ma sha'a-llah" (An
Arabic maxim meaning literally, 'What Allah wished,' and it indicates a good
omen.) One day, he asked us whether anyone of us had seen a dream. We
replied in the negative. The Prophet said, "But I had seen (a dream) last
night that two men came to me, caught hold of my hands, and took me to
the Sacred Land (Jerusalem). There, I saw a person sitting and another
standing with an iron hook in his hand pushing it inside the mouth of the
former till it reached the jaw-bone, and then tore off one side of his cheek,
and then did the same with the other side; in the mean-time the first side of
his cheek became normal again and then he repeated the same operation
again. I said, 'What is this?' They told me to proceed on and we went on till
we came to a man Lying flat on his back, and another man standing at his
head carrying a stone or a piece of rock, and crushing the head of the Lying
man, with that stone. Whenever he struck him, the stone rolled away.
The man went to pick it up and by the time he returned to him, the crushed
head had returned to its normal state and the man came back and struck
him again (and so on). I said, 'Who is this?' They told me to proceed on; so
we proceeded on and passed by a hole like an oven; with a narrow top and
wide bottom, and the fire was kindling underneath that hole. Whenever the
fire-flame went up, the people were lifted up to such an extent that they
about to get out of it, and whenever the fire got quieter, the people went
down into it, and there were naked men and women in it. I said, 'Who is
this?' They told me to proceed on. So we proceeded on till we reached a
river of blood and a man was in it, and another man was standing at its bank
with stones in front of him, facing the man standing in the river. Whenever
the man in the river wanted to come out, the other one threw a stone in his
mouth and caused him to retreat to his original position; and so whenever
he wanted to come out the other would throw a stone in his mouth, and he
would retreat to his original position. I asked, 'What is this?' They told me to
proceed on and we did so till we reached a well-flourished green garden
having a huge tree and near its root was sitting an old man with some
children. (I saw) Another man near the tree with fire in front of him and he
was kindling it up. Then they (i.e. my two companions) made me climb up
the tree and made me enter a house, better than which I have ever seen. In
it were some old men and young men, women and children.
Then they took me out of this house and made me climb up the tree and
made me enter another house that was better and superior (to the first)
containing old and young people. I said to them (i.e. my two companions),
'You have made me ramble all the night. Tell me all about that I have seen.'
They said, 'Yes. As for the one whose cheek you saw being torn away, he
was a liar and he used to tell lies, and the people would report those lies on
his authority till they spread all over the world. So, he will be punished like
that till the Day of Resurrection.
The one whose head you saw being crushed is the one whom Allah had
given the knowledge of Quran (i.e. knowing it by heart) but he used to sleep
at night (i.e. he did not recite it then) and did not use to act upon it (i.e.
upon its orders etc.) by day; and so this punishment will go on till the Day of
Resurrection. And those you saw in the hole (like oven) were adulterers
(those men and women who commit illegal sexual intercourse). And those
you saw in the river of blood were those dealing in Riba (usury). And the old
man who was sitting at the base of the tree was Abraham and the little
children around him were the offspring of the people. And the one who was
kindling the fire was Malik, the gate-keeper of the Hell-fire. And the first
house in which you have gone was the house of the common believers, and
the second house was of the martyrs. I am Gabriel and this is Michael. Raise
your head.' I raised my head and saw a thing like a cloud over me. They said,
'That is your place.' I said, 'Let me enter my place.' They said, 'You still have
some life which you have not yet completed, and when you complete (that
remaining portion of your life) you will then enter your place.' "

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 469:
Narrated Hisham's father:
Aisha said, "I went to Abu Bakr (during his fatal illness) and he asked me, 'In
how many garments was the Prophet shrouded?' She replied, 'In three
Sahuliya pieces of white cloth of cotton, and there was neither a shirt nor a
turban among them.' Abu Bakr further asked her, 'On which day did the
Prophet die?' She replied, 'He died on Monday.' He asked, 'What is today?'
She replied, 'Today is Monday.' He added, 'I hope I shall die sometime
between this morning and tonight.' Then he looked at a garment that he
was wearing during his illness and it had some stains of saffron. Then he
said, 'Wash this garment of mine and add two more garments and shroud
me in them.' I said, 'This is worn out.' He said, 'A living person has more right
to wear new clothes than a dead one; the shroud is only for the body's pus.'
He did not die till it was the night of Tuesday and was buried before the
morning."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 470:
Narrated Aisha:
A man said to the Prophet (p.b.u.h), "My mother died suddenly and I
thought that if she had lived she would have given alms. So, if I give alms
now on her behalf, will she get the reward?" The Prophet replied in the
affirmative.
Volume 2, Book 23, Number 471:
Narrated 'Aisha:
During his sickness, Allah's Apostle was asking repeatedly, "Where am I
today? Where will I be tomorrow?" And I was waiting for the day of my turn
(impatiently). Then, when my turn came, Allah took his soul away (in my lap)
between my chest and arms and he was buried in my house.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 472:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle in his fatal illness said, "Allah cursed the Jews and the
Christians, for they built the places of worship at the graves of their
prophets." And if that had not been the case, then the Prophet's grave
would have been made prominent before the people. So (the Prophet ) was
afraid, or the people were afraid that his grave might be taken as a place for
worship.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 473:
Narrated Abu Bakr bin 'Aiyash :
Sufyan At-Tammar told me that he had seen the grave of the Prophet
elevated and convex.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 474:
Narrated 'Urwa:
When the wall fell on them (i.e. graves) during the caliphate of Al-Walid bin
'Abdul Malik, the people started repairing it, and a foot appeared to them.
The people got scared and thought that it was the foot of the Prophet. Noone could be found who could tell them about it till I ('Urwa) said to them
"By Allah, this is not the foot of the Prophet but it is the foot of Umar."
Aisha narrated that she made a will to 'Abdullah bin Zubair, "Do not bury me
with them (the Prophet and his two companions) but bury me with my
companions (wives of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) ) in Al-Baqi as I would not like to
be looked upon as better than I really am (by being buried near the
Prophet)."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 475:
Narrated 'Amr bin Maimun Al-Audi:
I saw 'Umar bin Al-Khattab (when he was stabbed) saying, "O 'Abdullah bin
'Umar! Go to the mother of the believers Aisha and say, 'Umar bin AlKhattab sends his greetings to you,' and request her to allow me to be
buried with my companions." (So, Ibn 'Umar conveyed the message to
'Aisha.) She said, "I had the idea of having this place for myself but today I
prefer him ('Umar) to myself (and allow him to be buried there)." When
'Abdullah bin 'Umar returned, 'Umar asked him, "What (news) do you
have?" He replied, "O chief of the believers! She has allowed you (to be
buried there)." On that 'Umar said, "Nothing was more important to me
than to be buried in that (sacred) place. So, when I expire, carry me there
and pay my greetings to her ('Aisha ) and say, 'Umar bin Al-Khattab asks
permission; and if she gives permission, then bury me (there) and if she does
not, then take me to the grave-yard of the Muslims. I do not think any
person has more right for the caliphate than those with whom Allah's
Apostle (p.b.u.h) was always pleased till his death. And whoever is chosen
by the people after me will be the caliph, and you people must listen to him
and obey him," and then he mentioned the name of 'Uthman, 'Ali, Talha, AzZubair, 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf and Sad bin Abi Waqqas.
By this time a young man from Ansar came and said, "O chief of the
believers! Be happy with Allah's glad tidings. The grade which you have in
Islam is known to you, then you became the caliph and you ruled with justice
and then you have been awarded martyrdom after all this." 'Umar replied,
"O son of my brother! Would that all that privileges will counterbalance (my
short comings), so that I neither lose nor gain anything. I recommend my
successor to be good to the early emigrants and realize their rights and to
protect their honor and sacred things. And I also recommend him to be
good to the Ansar who before them, had homes (in Medina) and had
adopted the Faith. He should accept the good of the righteous among them
and should excuse their wrongdoers. I recommend him to abide by the rules
and regulations concerning the Dhimmis (protectees) of Allah and His
Apostle, to fulfill their contracts completely and fight for them and not to
tax (overburden) them beyond their capabilities."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 476:
Narrated 'Aisha :
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Don't abuse the dead, because they have
reached the result of what they forwarded."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 477:
Narrated Ibn Abbas.:
Abu Lahab, may Allah curse him, once said to the Prophet (p.b.u.h), "Perish
you all the day."
Then the Divine Inspiration came: "Perish the hands of Abi Lahab! And perish
he!" (111.1).

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 478:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Thy Prophet sent Muadh to Yemen and said, "Invite the people to testify
that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and I am Allah's Apostle,
and if they obey you to do so, then teach them that Allah has enjoined on
them five prayers in every day and night (in twenty-four hours), and if they
obey you to do so, then teach them that Allah has made it obligatory for
them to pay the Zakat from their property and it is to be taken from the
wealthy among them and given to the poor."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 479:
Narrated Abu Aiyub:
A man said to the Prophet "Tell me of such a deed as will make me enter
Paradise." The people said, "What is the matter with him? What is the
matter with him?" The Prophet said, "He has something to ask. (What he
needs greatly) The Prophet said: (In order to enter Paradise) you should
worship Allah and do not ascribe any partners to Him, offer prayer perfectly,
pay the Zakat and keep good relations with your Kith and kin." (See Hadith
No. 12, Vol 8).

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 480:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A Bedouin came to the Prophet and said, "Tell me of such a deed as will
make me enter Paradise, if I do it." The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Worship
Allah, and worship none along with Him, offer the (five) prescribed
compulsory prayers perfectly, pay the compulsory Zakat, and fast the month
of Ramadan." The Bedouin said, "By Him, in Whose Hands my life is, I will
not do more than this." When he (the Bedouin) left, the Prophet said,
"Whoever likes to see a man of Paradise, then he may look at this man."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 481:
Narrated Abu Zur'a:
from the Prophet the same as above.

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 482:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
A delegation of the tribe of 'Abdul Qais came to the Prophet and said, "O
Allah's Apostle! We are from the tribe of Rabi'a, and the infidels of the tribe
of Mudar stands between us and you; so we cannot come to you except
during the Sacred Months. Please order us to do something (religious
deeds) which we may carry out and also invite to it our people whom we
have left behind." The Prophet said, "I order you to do four things and
forbid you four others: (I order you) to have faith in Allah, and confess that
none has the right to be worshipped but Allah, (and the Prophet gestured
with his hand like this (i.e. one knot) and to offer prayers perfectly and to
pay the Zakat, and to pay one-fifth of the booty in Allah's Cause. And I forbid
you to use Dubba', Hantam, Naqir and Muzaffat (all these are the names of
utensils used for preparing alcoholic drinks)."

Volume 2, Book 23, Number 483:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
When Allah's Apostle died and Abu Bakr became the caliph some Arabs
renegade (reverted to disbelief) (Abu Bakr decided to declare war against
them), 'Umar, said to Abu Bakr, "How can you fight with these people
although Allah's Apostle said, 'I have been ordered (by Allah) to fight the
people till they say: "None has the right to be worshipped but Allah, and
whoever said it then he will save his life and property from me except on
trespassing the law (rights and conditions for which he will be punished
justly), and his accounts will be with Allah.' " Abu Bakr said, "By Allah! I will
fight those who differentiate between the prayer and the Zakat as Zakat is
the compulsory right to be taken from the property (according to Allah's
orders) By Allah! If they refuse to pay me even a she-kid which they used to
pay at the time of Allah's Apostle . I would fight with them for withholding
it" Then 'Umar said, "By Allah, it was nothing, but Allah opened Abu Bakr's
chest towards the decision (to fight) and I came to know that his decision
was right."


BOOK 24. OBLIGATORY CHARITY TAX (ZAKAT) (484-578)
Volume 2, Book 24, Number 484:
Narrated Jarir bin 'Abdullah ,
I gave the pledge of allegiance to the Prophet for offering prayer perfectly
giving Zakat and giving good advice to every Muslim.

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 485:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "(On the Day of Resurrection) camels will come to their
owner in the best state of health they have ever had (in the world), and if he
had not paid their Zakat (in the world) then they would tread him with their
feet; and similarly, sheep will come to their owner in the best state of health
they have ever had in the world, and if he had not paid their Zakat, then they
would tread him with their hooves and would butt him with their horns."
The Prophet added, "One of their rights is that they should be milked while
water is kept in front of them." The Prophet added, "I do not want anyone
of you to come to me on the Day of Resurrection, carrying over his neck a
sheep that will be bleating. Such a person will (then) say, 'O Muhammad!
(please intercede for me,) I will say to him. 'I can't help you, for I conveyed
Allah's Message to you.' Similarly, I do not want anyone of you to come to
me carrying over his neck a camel that will be grunting. Such a person (then)
will say "O Muhammad! (please intercede for me)." I will say to him, "I can't
help you for I conveyed Allah's message to you."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 486:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever is made wealthy by Allah and does not pay
the Zakat of his wealth, then on the Day of Resurrection his wealth will be
made like a bald-headed poisonous male snake with two black spots over
the eyes. The snake will encircle his neck and bite his cheeks and say, 'I am
your wealth, I am your treasure.' " Then the Prophet recited the holy verses:- 'Let not those who withhold . . .' (to the end of the verse). (3.180).

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 487:
Narrated Abu Said:
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "No Zakat is due on property mounting to less
than five Uqiyas (of silver), and no Zakat is due on less than five camels, and
there is no Zakat on less than five Wasqs." (A Wasqs equals 60 Sa's) & (1
Sa=3 K gms App.)

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 488:
Narrated Zaid bin Wahab:
I passed by a place called Ar-Rabadha and by chance I met Abu Dhar and
asked him, "What has brought you to this place?" He said, "I was in Sham
and differed with Muawiya on the meaning of (the following verses of the
Quran): 'They who hoard up gold and silver and spend them not in the way
of Allah.' (9.34). Muawiya said, 'This verse is revealed regarding the people
of the scriptures." I said, It was revealed regarding us and also the people of
the scriptures." So we had a quarrel and Mu'awiya sent a complaint against
me to 'Uthman. 'Uthman wrote to me to come to Medina, and I came to
Medina. Many people came to me as if they had not seen me before. So I
told this to 'Uthman who said to me, "You may depart and live nearby if you
wish." That was the reason for my being here for even if an Ethiopian had
been nominated as my ruler, I would have obeyed him .

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 489:
Narrated Al-Ahnaf bin Qais:
While I was sitting with some people from Quraish, a man with very rough
hair, clothes, and appearance came and stood in front of us, greeted us and
said, "Inform those who hoard wealth, that a stone will be heated in the
Hell-fire and will be put on the nipples of their breasts till it comes out from
the bones of their shoulders and then put on the bones of their shoulders till
it comes through the nipples of their breasts the stone will be moving and
hitting." After saying that, the person retreated and sat by the side of the
pillar, I followed him and sat beside him, and I did not know who he was. I
said to him, "I think the people disliked what you had said." He said, "These
people do not understand anything, although my friend told me." I asked,
"Who is your friend?" He said, "The Prophet said (to me), 'O Abu Dhar! Do
you see the mountain of Uhud?' And on that I (Abu Dhar) started looking
towards the sun to judge how much remained of the day as I thought that
Allah's Apostle wanted to send me to do something for him and I said, 'Yes!'
He said, 'I do not love to have gold equal to the mountain of Uhud unless I
spend it all (in Allah's cause) except three Dinars (pounds). These people do
not understand and collect worldly wealth. No, by Allah, Neither I ask them
for worldly benefits nor am I in need of their religious advice till I meet Allah,
The Honorable, The Majestic." '

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 490:
Narrated Ibn Masud:
I heard the Prophet saying, "There is no envy except in two: a person whom
Allah has given wealth and he spends it in the right way, and a person whom
Allah has given wisdom (i.e. religious knowledge) and he gives his decisions
accordingly and teaches it to the others."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 491:
Narrated Abu Huraira
Allah's Apostle said, "If one give in charity what equals one date-fruit fro the
honestly-earned money and Allah accepts only the honestly earned money --
Allah takes it in His right (hand) ar then enlarges its reward for that person
(who has given it), as anyone of you brings up his baby horse, so much s that
it becomes as big as a mountain

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 492:
Narrated Haritha bin Wahab :
I heard the Prophet saying, "O people! Give in charity as a time will come
upon you when a person will wander about with his object of charity and
will not find anybody to accept it, and one (who will be requested to take it)
will say, "If you had brought it yesterday, would have taken it, but to-day I
am not in need of it."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 493:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The Hour (Day of Judgment) will not be established till
your wealth increases so much so that one will be worried, for no one will
accept his Zakat and the person to whom he will give it will reply, 'I am not
in need of it.' "

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 494:
Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim:
While I was sitting with Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) two person came to him;
one of them complained about his poverty and the other complained about
the prevalence of robberies. Allah's Apostle said, "As regards stealing and
robberies, there will shortly come a time when a caravan will go to Mecca
(from Medina) without any guard. And regarding poverty, The Hour (Day of
Judgment) will not be established till one of you wanders about with his
object of charity and will not find anybody to accept it And (no doubt) each
one of you will stand in front of Allah and there will be neither a curtain nor
an interpreter between him and Allah, and Allah will ask him, 'Did not I give
you wealth?' He will reply in the affirmative. Allah will further ask, 'Didn't I
send a messenger to you?' And again that person will reply in the affirmative
Then he will look to his right and he will see nothing but Hell-fire, and then
he will look to his left and will see nothing but Hell-fire. And so, any (each
one) of you should save himself from the fire even by giving half of a datefruit (in charity). And if you do not find a half date-fruit, then (you can do it
through saying) a good pleasant word (to your brethren). (See Hadith No.
793 Vol. 4).

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 495:
Narrated Abu Musa:
Thy Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "A time will come upon the people when a
person will wander about with gold as Zakat and will not find anybody to
accept it, and one man will be seen followed by forty women to be their
guardian because of scarcity of men and great number of women. "

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 496:
Narrated Abu Masud:
When the verses of charity were revealed, we used to work as porters. A
man came and distributed objects of charity in abundance. And they (the
people) said, "He is showing off." And another man came and gave a sa (a
small measure of food grains); they said, "Allah is not in need of this small
amount of charity." And then the Divine Inspiration came: "Those who
criticize such of the believers who give in charity voluntarily and those who
could not find to give in charity except what is available to them." (9.79).

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 497:
Narrated Abu Masud Al-Ansar:
Whenever Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) ordered us to give in charity, we used to
go to the market and work as porters and get a Mudd (a special measure of
grain) and then give it in charity. (Those were the days of poverty) and today some of us have one hundred thousand.

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 498:
Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim heard the Prophet saying:
"Save yourself from Hell-fire even by giving half a date-fruit in charity."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 499:
Narrated Aisha:
A lady along with her two daughters came to me asking (for some alms), but
she found nothing with me except one date which I gave to her and she
divided it between her two daughters, and did not eat anything herself, and
then she got up and went away. Then the Prophet came in and I informed
him about this story. He said, "Whoever is put to trial by these daughters
and he treats them generously (with benevolence) then these daughters
will act as a shield for him from Hell-Fire." (See Hadith No. 24, Vol. 8).

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 500:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man came to the Prophet and asked, "O Allah's Apostle! Which charity is
the most superior in reward?" He replied, "The charity which you practice
while you are healthy, niggardly and afraid of poverty and wish to become
wealthy. Do not delay it to the time of approaching death and then say,
'Give so much to such and such, and so much to such and such.' And it has
already belonged to such and such (as it is too late)."
Volume 2, Book 24, Number 501:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Some of the wives of the Prophet asked him, "Who amongst us will be the
first to follow you (i.e. die after you)?" He said, "Whoever has the longest
hand." So they started measuring their hands with a stick and Sauda's hand
turned out to be the longest. (When Zainab bint Jahsh died first of all in the
caliphate of 'Umar), we came to know that the long hand was a symbol of
practicing charity, so she was the first to follow the Prophet and she used to
love to practice charity. (Sauda died later in the caliphate of Muawiya).

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 502:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "A man said that he would give something in
charity. He went out with his object of charity and unknowingly gave it to a
thief. Next morning the people said that he had given his object of charity to
a thief. (On hearing that) he said, "O Allah! All the praises are for you. I will
give alms again." And so he again went out with his alms and (unknowingly)
gave it to an adulteress. Next morning the people said that he had given his
alms to an adulteress last night. The man said, "O Allah! All the praises are
for you. (I gave my alms) to an adulteress. I will give alms again." So he went
out with his alms again and (unknowingly) gave it to a rich person. (The
people) next morning said that he had given his alms to a wealthy person.
He said, "O Allah! All the praises are for you. (I had given alms) to a thief, to
an adulteress and to a wealthy man." Then someone came and said to him,
"The alms which you gave to the thief, might make him abstain from
stealing, and that given to the adulteress might make her abstain from
illegal sexual intercourse (adultery), and that given to the wealthy man
might make him take a lesson from it and spend his wealth which Allah has
given him, in Allah's cause."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 503:
Narrated Ma'n bin Yazid:
My grandfather, my father and I gave the pledge of allegiance to Allah's
Apostle. The Prophet got me engaged and then got me married. One day I
went to the Prophet with a complaint. My father Yazid had taken some gold
coins for charity and kept them with a man in the mosque (to give them to
the poor) But I went and took them and brought them to him (my father).
My father said, "By Allah! I did not intend to give them to you. " I took (the
case) to Allah's Apostle . On that Allah's Apostle said, "O Yazid! You will be
rewarded for what you intended. O Man! Whatever you have taken is
yours."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 504:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Seven people will be shaded by Allah under His
shade on the day when there will be no shade except His. They are:
(1) a just ruler;
(2) a young man who has been brought up in the worship of Allah, (i.e.
worship Allah (Alone) sincerely from his childhood),
(3) a man whose heart is attached to the mosque (who offers the five
compulsory congregational prayers in the mosque);
(4) two persons who love each other only for Allah's sake and they meet
and part in Allah's cause only;
(5) a man who refuses the call of a charming woman of noble birth for an
illegal sexual intercourse with her and says: I am afraid of Allah;
(6) a person who practices charity so secretly that his left hand does not
know what his right hand has given (i.e. nobody knows how much he has
given in charity).
(7) a person who remembers Allah in seclusion and his eyes get flooded with
tears."
Volume 2, Book 24, Number 505:
Narrated Haritha bin Wahab Al-Khuza'i:
I heard the Prophet (p.b.u.h) saying, "(O people!) Give in charity (for Allah's
cause) because a time will come when a person will carry his object of
charity from place to place (and he will not find any person to take it) and
any person whom he shall request to take it, I will reply, 'If you had brought
it yesterday I would have taken it, but today I am not
in need of it."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 506:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said, "When a woman gives in charity some of the foodstuff
(which she has in her house) without spoiling it, she will receive the reward
for what she has spent, and her husband will receive the reward because of
his earning, and the storekeeper will also have a reward similar to it. The
reward of one will not decrease the reward of the others . "

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 507:
Narrated Abu Huraira :
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "The best charity is that which is practiced by a
wealthy person. And start giving first to your dependents."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 508:
Narrated Hakim bin Hizam
The Prophet said, "The upper hand is better than the lower hand (i.e. he
who gives in charity is better than him who takes it). One should start giving
first to his dependents. And the best object of charity is that which is given
by a wealthy person (from the money which is left after his expenses). And
whoever abstains from asking others for some financial help, Allah will give
him and save him from asking others, Allah will make him self-sufficient."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 509:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
I heard Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) while he was on the pulpit speaking about
charity, to abstain from asking others for some financial help and about
begging others, saying, "The upper hand is better than the lower hand. The
upper hand is that of the giver and the lower (hand) is that of the beggar."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 510:
Narrated 'Uqba bin Al-Harith:
Once the Prophet offered the 'Asr prayer and then hurriedly went to his
house and returned immediately. I (or somebody else) asked him (as to
what was the matter) and he said, "I left at home a piece of gold which was
from the charity and I disliked to let it remain a night in my house, so I got it
distributed . "

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 511:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet went out for the 'Id prayer on the 'Id day and offered a two
Rakat prayer; and he neither offered a prayer before it or after it. Then he
went towards the women along with Bilal. He preached them and ordered
them to give in charity. And some (amongst the women) started giving their
fore-arm bangles and ear-rings.
Volume 2, Book 24, Number 512:
Narrated Abu Burda bin Abu Musa:
that his father said, "Whenever a beggar came to Allah's Apostle or he was
asked for something, he used to say (to his companions), "Help and
recommend him and you will receive the reward for it; and Allah will bring
about what He will through His Prophet's tongue."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 513:
Narrated Asma:
The Prophet said to me, "Do not withhold your money, (for if you did so)
Allah would with-hold His blessings from you."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 514:
Narrated 'Abda:
T he Prophet said, "Do not with-hold your money by counting it (i.e.
hoarding it), (for if you did so), Allah would also with-hold His blessings from
you."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 515:
Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr:
that she had gone to the Prophet and he said, "Do not shut your money bag;
otherwise Allah too will with-hold His blessings from you. Spend (in Allah's
Cause) as much as you can afford. "

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 516:
Narrated Abu Wail:
Hudhaifa said, "'Umar said, 'Who amongst you remembers the statement of
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) about afflictions'?' I said, 'I know it as the Prophet
had said it.' 'Umar said, 'No doubt, you are bold. How did he say it?' I said, 'A
man's afflictions (wrong deeds) concerning his wife, children and neighbors
are expiated by (his) prayers, charity, and enjoining good.' (The sub-narrator
Sulaiman added that he said, 'The prayer, charity, enjoining good and
forbidding evil.') 'Umar said, 'I did not mean that, but I ask about that
affliction which will spread like the waves of the sea.' I said, 'O chief of the
believers! You need not be afraid of it as there is a closed door between you
and it.' He asked, 'Will the door be broken or opened?' I replied, 'No, it will
be broken.' He said, 'Then, if it is broken, it will never be closed again?' I
replied, 'Yes.' " Then we were afraid to ask what that door was, so we asked
Masruq to inquire, and he asked Hudhaifa regarding it. Hudhaifa said, "The
door was 'Umar. "We further asked Hudhaifa whether 'Umar knew what
that door meant. Hudhaifa replied in the affirmative and added, "He knew it
as one knows that there will be a night before the tomorrow morning."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 517:
Narrated Hakim bin Hizam:
I said to Allah's Apostle, "Before embracing Islam I used to do good deeds
like giving in charity, slave-manumitting, and the keeping of good relations
with Kith and kin. Shall I be rewarded for those deeds?" The Prophet replied,
"You became Muslim with all those good deeds (Without losing their
reward)."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 518:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said, "When a woman gives in charity from her husband's
meals without wasting the property of her husband, she will get a reward
for it, and her husband too will get a reward for what he earned and the
store-keeper will have the reward likewise."
Volume 2, Book 24, Number 519:
Narrated Abu Musa :
The Prophet said, "An honest Muslim store-keeper who carries out the
orders of his master and pays fully what he has been ordered to give with a
good heart and pays to that person to whom he was ordered to pay, is
regarded as one of the two charitable persons."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 520:
Narrate Aisha :
The Prophet said, "If a woman gives in charity from her husband's house .."
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) also said, "If a lady gives meals (in charity) from her
husband's house without spoiling her husband's property, she will get a
reward and her husband will also get a reward likewise. The husband will get
a reward because of his earnings and the woman because of her spending."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 521:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "When a woman gives in charity from her house meals in
Allah's Cause without spoiling her husband's property, she will get a reward
for it, and her husband will also get the reward for his earnings and the
storekeeper will get a reward likewise."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 522:
Narrated Abu Huraira :
The Prophet said, "Every day two angels come down from Heaven and one
of them says, 'O Allah! Compensate every person who spends in Your
Cause,' and the other (angel) says, 'O Allah! Destroy every miser.' 
Volume 2, Book 24, Number 523:
Narrated Abu Huraira :
The Prophet said, "The example of a miser and an alms-giver is like the
example of two persons wearing iron cloaks." Allah's Apostle also said, "The
example of an alms-giver and a miser is like the example of two persons who
have two iron cloaks on them from their breasts to their collar bones, and
when the alms-giver wants to give in charity, the cloak becomes capacious
till it covers his whole body to such an extent that it hides his fingertips and
covers his footprints (obliterates his tracks). (1) And when the miser wants
to spend, it (the iron cloak) sticks and every ring gets stuck to its place and
he tries to widen it, but it did not become wide.

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 524:
Narrated Abu Burda:
from his father from his grandfather that the Prophet said, "Every Muslim
has to give in charity." The people asked, "O Allah's Prophet! If someone has
nothing to give, what will he do?" He said, "He should work with his hands
and benefit himself and also give in charity (from what he earns)." The
people further asked, "If he cannot find even that?" He replied, "He should
help the needy who appeal for help." Then the people asked, "If he cannot
do that?" He replied, "Then he should perform good deeds and keep away
from evil deeds and this will be regarded as charitable deeds."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 525:
Narrated Um 'Atiyya:
A sheep was sent to me (Nusaiba Al-Ansariya) (in charity) and I sent some of
it to 'Aisha. The Prophet asked 'Aisha for something to eat. 'Aisha replied
that there was nothing except what Nusaiba Al-Ansariya had sent of that
sheep. The Prophet said to her, "Bring it as it has reached its place."
Volume 2, Book 24, Number 526:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri :
Allah's Apostle said, "There is no Zakat on less than five camels and also
there is no Zakat on less than five Awaq (of silver). (5 Awaq = 22 Fransa
Riyals of Yamen or 200 Dirhams.) And there is no Zakat on less than five
Awsuq. (A special measure of food-grains, and one Wasq equals 60 Sa's.)
(For gold 20, Dinars i.e. equal to 12 Guinea English. No Zakat for less than 12
Guinea (English) of gold or for silver less than 22 Fransa Riyals of Yamen.)

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 527:
Narrated Abi Sa'id Al-Khudri :
I heard the Prophet saying (as above--No. 526 ..)

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 528:
Narrated Anas:
Abu Bakr wrote to me what Allah had instructed His Apostle (p.b.u.h) to do
regarding the one who had to pay one Bint Makhad (i.e. one year-old shecamel) as Zakat, and he did not have it but had got Bint Labun (two year old
she-camel). (He wrote that) it could be accepted from him as Zakat, and the
collector of Zakat would return him 20 Dirhams or two sheep; and if the
Zakat payer had not a Bint Makhad, but he had Ibn Labun (a two year old hecamel) then it could be accepted as his Zakat, but he would not be paid
anything .

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 529:
Narrated Ibn Abbas :
I am a witness that Allah's Apostle offered the Id prayer before delivering
the sermon and then he thought that the women would not be able to hear
him (because of the distance), so he went to them along with Bilal who was
spreading his garment. The Prophet advised and ordered them to give in
charity. So the women started giving their ornaments (in charity). (The subnarrator Aiyub pointed towards his ears and neck meaning that they gave
ornaments from those places such as ear-rings and necklaces.)

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 530:
Narrated Anas:
Abu Bakr wrote to me what was made compulsory by Allah's Apostle and
that was (regarding the payments of Zakat): Neither the property of
different people may be taken together nor the joint property may be split
for fear of (paying more, or receiving less) Zakat. (1)

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 531:
Narrated Anas:
Abu Bakr wrote to me what Allah's Apostle has made compulsory (regarding
Zakat) and this was mentioned in it: If a property is equally owned by two
partners, they should pay the combined Zakat and it will be considered that
both of them have paid their Zakat equally.

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 532:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
A Bedouin asked Allah's Apostle about the emigration. The Prophet (p.b.u.h)
said, "May Allah have mercy on you! The matter of emigration is very hard.
Have you got camels? Do you pay their Zakat?" The Bedouin said, "Yes, I
have camels and I pay their Zakat." The Prophet said, Work beyond the seas
and Allah will not decrease (waste) any of your good deeds." (See Hadith
No. 260 Vol. 5).

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 533:
Narrated Anas:
Abu Bakr , wrote to me about the Zakat which Allah had ordered His Apostle
to observe: Whoever had to pay Jahda (Jahda means a four-year-old shecamel) as Zakat from his herd of camels and he had not got one, and he had
Hiqqa (three-year-old she-camel), that Hiqqa should be accepted from him
along with two sheep if they were available or twenty Dirhams (one Durham
equals about 1/4 Saudi Riyal) and whoever had to pay Hiqqa as Zakat and he
had no Hiqqa but had a Jadha, the Jadha should be accepted from him, and
the Zakat collector should repay him twenty Dirhams or two sheep; and
whoever had to pay Hiqqa as Zakat and he had not got one, but had a Bint
Labun (two-year-old she-camel), it should be accepted from him along with
two sheep or twenty Dirhams; and whoever had to pay Bint Labun and had a
Hiqqa, that Hiqqa should be accepted from him and the Zakat collector
should repay him twenty Dirhams or two sheep; and whoever had to pay
Bint Labun and he had not got one but had a Bint Makhad (one-year-old she
camel), that Bint Makhad should be accepted from him along with twenty
Dirhams or two sheep.

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 534:
Narrated Anas:
When Abu Bakr; sent me to (collect the Zakat from) Bahrein, he wrote to me
the following:-- (In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful). These
are the orders for compulsory charity (Zakat) which Allah's Apostle had
made obligatory for every Muslim, and which Allah had ordered His Apostle
to observe: Whoever amongst the Muslims is asked to pay Zakat
accordingly, he should pay it (to the Zakat collector) and whoever is asked
more than that (what is specified in this script) he should not pay it; for
twenty-four camels or less, sheep are to be paid as Zakat; for every five
camels one sheep is to be paid, and if there are between twenty-five to
thirty-five camels, one Bint Makhad is to be paid; and if they are between
thirty-six to forty-five (camels), one Bint Labun is to be paid; and if they are
between forty-six to sixty (camels), one Hiqqa is to be paid; and if the
number is between sixty-one to seventy-five (camels), one Jadh'a is to be
paid; and if the number is between seventy-six to ninety (camels), two Bint
Labuns are to be paid; and if they are from ninety-one to one-hundred-and
twenty (camels), two Hiqqas are to be paid; and if they are over onehundred and-twenty (camels), for every forty (over one-hundred-andtwenty) one Bint Labun is to be paid, and for every fifty camels (over onehundred-and-twenty) one Hiqqa is to be paid; and who ever has got only
four camels, has to pay nothing as Zakat, but if the owner of these four
camels wants to give something, he can. If the number of camels increases
to five, the owner has to pay one sheep as Zakat. As regards the Zakat for
the (flock) of sheep; if they are between forty and one-hundred-and-twenty
sheep, one sheep is to be paid; and if they are between one-hundred-andtwenty to two hundred (sheep), two sheep are to be paid; and if they are
between two-hundred to three-hundred (sheep), three sheep are to be paid;
and for over three-hundred sheep, for every extra hundred sheep, one
sheep is to be paid as Zakat. And if somebody has got less than forty sheep,
no Zakat is required, but if he wants to give, he can. For silver the Zakat is
one-fortieth of the lot (i.e. 2.5%), and if its value is less than two-hundred
Dirhams, Zakat is not required, but if the owner wants to pay he can.'

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 535:
Narrated Anas:
Abu Bakr wrote to me what Allah had ordered His Apostle (about Zakat)
which goes: Neither an old nor a defected animal, nor a male-goat may be
taken as Zakat except if the Zakat collector wishes (to take it).

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 536:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Abu Bakr said, "By Allah! If they (pay me the Zakat and) with-hold even a
she-kid which they used to pay during the life-time of Allah's Apostle, I will
fight with them for it." 'Umar said, "It was nothing but Allah Who opened
Abu Bakr's chest towards the decision to fight, and I came to know that his
decision was right."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 537:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
When Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) sent Muadh to Yemen, he said (to him),
"YOU are going to people of a (Divine) Book. First of all invite them to
worship Allah (alone) and when they come to know Allah, inform them that
Allah has enjoined on them, five prayers in every day and night; and if they
start offering these prayers, inform them that Allah has enjoined on them,
the Zakat. And it is to be taken from the rich amongst them and given to the
poor amongst them; and if they obey you in that, take Zakat from them and
avoid (don't take) the best property of the people as Zakat."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 538:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri :
Allah's Apostle said, "No Zakat is imposed on less than five Awsuq of dates;
no Zakat is imposed on less than five Awaq of silver, and no Zakat is imposed
on less than five camels."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 539:
Narrated Abu Dhar:
Once I went to him (the Prophet ) and he said, "By Allah in Whose Hands my
life is (or probably said, 'By Allah, except Whom none has the right to be
worshipped) whoever had camels or cows or sheep and did not pay their
Zakat, those animals will be brought on the Day of Resurrection far bigger
and fatter than before and they will tread him under their hooves, and will
butt him with their horns, and (those animals will come in circle): When the
last does its turn, the first will start again, and this punishment will go on till
Allah has finished the judgments amongst the people."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 540:
Narrated Ishaq bin 'Abdullah bin Al Talha:
I heard Anas bin Malik saying, "Abu Talha had more property of date-palm
trees gardens than any other amongst the Ansar in Medina and the most
beloved of them to him was Bairuha garden, and it was in front of the
Mosque of the Prophet . Allah's Apostle used to go there and used to drink
its nice water." Anas added, "When these verses were revealed:--'By no
means shall you Attain righteousness unless You spend (in charity) of that
Which you love. ' (3.92) Abu Talha said to Allah's Apostle 'O Allah's Apostle!
Allah, the Blessed, the Superior says: By no means shall you attain
righteousness, unless you spend (in charity) of that which you love. And no
doubt, Bairuha' garden is the most beloved of all my property to me. So I
want to give it in charity in Allah's Cause. I expect its reward from Allah. O
Allah's Apostle! Spend it where Allah makes you think it feasible.' On that
Allah's Apostle said, 'Bravo! It is useful property. I have heard what you have
said (O Abu Talha), and I think it would be proper if you gave it to your Kith
and kin.' Abu Talha said, I will do so, O Allah's Apostle.' Then Abu Talha
distributed that garden amongst his relatives and his cousins."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 541:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri
On 'Id ul Fitr or 'Id ul Adha Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) went out to the Musalla.
After finishing the prayer, he delivered the sermon and ordered the people
to give alms. He said, "O people! Give alms." Then he went towards the
women and said. "O women! Give alms, for I have seen that the majority of
the dwellers of Hell-Fire were you (women)." The women asked, "O Allah's
Apostle! What is the reason for it?" He replied, "O women! You curse
frequently, and are ungrateful to your husbands. I have not seen anyone
more deficient in intelligence and religion than you. O women, some of you
can lead a cautious wise man astray." Then he left. And when he reached his
house, Zainab, the wife of Ibn Masud, came and asked permission to enter It
was said, "O Allah's Apostle! It is Zainab." He asked, 'Which Zainab?" The
reply was that she was the wife of Ibn Mas'ub. He said, "Yes, allow her to
enter." And she was admitted. Then she said, "O Prophet of Allah! Today
you ordered people to give alms and I had an ornament and intended to give
it as alms, but Ibn Masud said that he and his children deserved it more than
anybody else." The Prophet replied, "Ibn Masud had spoken the truth. Your
husband and your children had more right to it than anybody else."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 542:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "There is no Zakat either on a horse or a slave belonging
to a Muslim"

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 543:
Narrated Abu Huraira :The Prophet said,"There is no Zakat either on a slave or on a horse
belonging to a Muslim.

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 544:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri :
Once the Prophet sat on a pulpit and we sat around him. Then he said, "The
things I am afraid of most for your sake (concerning what will befall you
after me) is the pleasures and splendors of the world and its beauties which
will be disclosed to you." Somebody said, "O Allah's Apostle! Can the good
bring forth evil?" The Prophet remained silent for a while. It was said to that
person, "What is wrong with you? You are talking to the Prophet (p.b.u.h)
while he is not talking to you." Then we noticed that he was being inspired
divinely. Then the Prophet wiped off his sweat and said, "Where is the
questioner?" It seemed as if the Prophet liked his question. Then he said,
"Good never brings forth evil. Indeed it is like what grows on the banks of a
water-stream which either kill or make the animals sick, except if an animal
eats its fill the Khadira (a kind of vegetable) and then faces the sun, and then
defecates and urinates and grazes again. No doubt this wealth is sweet and
green. Blessed is the wealth of a Muslim from which he gives to the poor,
the orphans and to needy travelers. (Or the Prophet said something similar
to it) No doubt, whoever takes it illegally will be like the one who eats but is
never satisfied, and his wealth will be a witness against him on the Day of
Resurrection."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 545:
Narrated 'Amr bin Al-Harith:
Zainab, the wife of 'Abdullah said, "I was in the Mosque and saw the
Prophet (p.b.u.h) saying, 'O women ! Give alms even from your ornaments.'
" Zainab used to provide for 'Abdullah and those orphans who were under
her protection. So she said to 'Abdullah, "Will you ask Allah's Apostle
whether it will be sufficient for me to spend part of the Zakat on you and the
orphans who are under my protection?" He replied "Will you yourself ask
Allah's Apostle ?" (Zainab added): So I went to the Prophet and I saw there
an Ansari woman who was standing at the door (of the Prophet ) with a
similar problem as mine. Bilal passed by us and we asked him, 'Ask the
Prophet whether it is permissible for me to spend (the Zakat) on my
husband and the orphans under my protection.' And we requested Bilal not
to inform the Prophet about us. So Bilal went inside and asked the Prophet
regarding our problem. The Prophet (p.b.u.h) asked, "Who are those two?"
Bilal replied that she was Zainab. The Prophet said, "Which Zainab?" Bilal
said, "The wife of 'Adullah (bin Masud)." The Prophet said, "Yes, (it is
sufficient for her) and she will receive a double rewards (for that): One for
helping relatives, and the other for giving Zakat."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 546:
Narrated Zainab,:
(the daughter of Um Salama) My mother said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall I
receive a reward if I spend for the sustenance of Abu Salama's offspring,
and in fact they are also my sons?" The Prophet replied, "Spend on them and
you will get a reward for what you spend on them."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 547:
Narrated Abu Huraira
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) ordered (a person) to collect Zakat, and that person
returned and told him that Ibn Jamil, Khalid bin Al-Walid, and Abbas bin
'Abdul Muttalib had refused to give Zakat." The Prophet said, "What made
Ibn Jamll refuse to give Zakat though he was a poor man, and was made
wealthy by Allah and His Apostle ? But you are unfair in asking Zakat from
Khalid as he is keeping his armor for Allah's Cause (for Jihad). As for Abbas
bin 'Abdul Muttalib, he is the uncle of Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) and Zakat is
compulsory on him and he should pay it double."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 548:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Some Ansari persons asked for (something) from Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h)
and he gave them. They again asked him for (something) and he again gave
them. And then they asked him and he gave them again till all that was with
him finished. And then he said "If I had anything. I would not keep it away
from you. (Remember) Whoever abstains from asking others, Allah will
make him contented, and whoever tries to make himself self-sufficient, Allah
will make him self-sufficient. And whoever remains patient, Allah will make
him patient. Nobody can be given a blessing better and greater than
patience."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 549:
Narrated Abu Huraira :
Allah's Apostle said, "By Him in Whose Hand my life is, it is better for anyone
of you to take a rope and cut the wood (from the forest) and carry it over
his back and sell it (as a means of earning his living) rather than to ask a
person for something and that person may give him or not."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 550:
Narrated Az-Zubair bin Al'Awwam:
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "It is better for anyone of you to take a rope (and
cut) and bring a bundle of wood (from the forest) over his back and sell it
and Allah will save his face (from the Hell-Fire) because of that, rather than
to ask the people who may give him or not."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 551:
Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair and Said bin Al-Musaiyab:
Haklm bin Hizam said, "(Once) I asked Allah's Apostle (for something) and
he gave it to me. Again I asked and he gave (it to me). Again I asked and he
gave (it to me). And then he said, "O Hakim! This property is like a sweet
fresh fruit; whoever takes it without greediness, he is blessed in it, and
whoever takes it with greediness, he is not blessed in it, and he is like a
person who eats but is never satisfied; and the upper (giving) hand is better
than the lower (receiving) hand." Hakim added, "I said to Allah's Apostle ,
'By Him (Allah) Who sent you with the Truth, I shall never accept anything
from anybody after you, till I leave this world.' " Then Abu Bakr (during his
caliphate) called Hakim to give him his share from the war booty (like the
other companions of the Prophet ), he refused to accept anything. Then
'Umar (during his caliphate) called him to give him his share but he refused.
On that 'Umar said, "O Muslims! I would like you to witness that I offered
Hakim his share from this booty and he refused to take it." So Hakim never
took anything from anybody after the Prophet till he died.

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 552:
Narrated 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle used to give me something but I would say to him, "would
you give it to a poorer and more needy one than l?" The Prophet (p.b.u.h)
said to me, "Take it. If you are given something from this property, without
asking for it or having greed for it take it; and if not given, do not run for it."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 553:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar
The Prophet said, "A man keeps on asking others for something till he
comes on the Day of Resurrection without any piece of flesh on his face."
The Prophet added, "On the Day of Resurrection, the Sun will come near (to,
the people) to such an extent that the sweat will reach up to the middle of
the ears, so, when all the people are in that state, they will ask Adam for
help, and then Moses, and then Muhammad (p.b.u.h) ." The sub-narrator
added "Muhammad will intercede with Allah to judge amongst the people.
He will proceed on till he will hold the ring of the door (of Paradise) and then
Allah will exalt him to Maqam Mahmud (the privilege of intercession, etc.).
And all the people of the gathering will send their praises to Allah.

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 554:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The poor person is not the one who asks a morsel or two
(of meals) from the others, but the poor is the one who has nothing and is
ashamed to beg from others."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 555:
Narrated Ash-sha'bi:
The clerk of Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba narrated, "Muawiya wrote to Al-Mughira
bin Shu'ba: Write to me something which you have heard from the Prophet
(p.b.u.h) ." So Al-Mughira wrote: I heard the Prophet saying, "Allah has
hated for you three things:
1. Vain talks, (useless talk) that you talk too much or about others.
2. Wasting of wealth (by extravagance)
3. And asking too many questions (in disputed religious matters) or asking
others for something (except in great need). (See Hadith No. 591, Vol. Ill)

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 556:
Narrated Sad (bin Abi Waqqas) :
Allah's Apostle distributed something (from the resources of Zakat)
amongst a group of people while I was sitting amongst them, but he left a
man whom I considered the best of the lot. So, I went up to Allah's Apostle
and asked him secretly, "Why have you left that person? By Allah! I consider
him a believer." The Prophet said, "Or merely a Muslim (Who surrender to
Allah)." I remained quiet for a while but could not help repeating my
question because of what I knew about him. I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Why
have you left that person? By Allah! I consider him a believer. " The Prophet
said, "Or merely a Muslim." I remained quiet for a while but could not help
repeating my question because of what I knew about him. I said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Why have you left that person? By Allah! I consider him a believer."
The Prophet said, "Or merely a Muslim." Then Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said,
"I give to a person while another is dearer to me, for fear that he may be
thrown in the Hell-fire on his face (by renegating from Islam)."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 557:
Narrated Abu Huraira
Allah's Apostle said, "The poor person is not the one who goes round the
people and ask them for a mouthful or two (of meals) or a date or two but
the poor is that who has not enough (money) to satisfy his needs and whose
condition is not known to others, that others may give him something in
charity, and who does not beg of people."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 558:
Narrated Abu Huraira
The Prophet said, "No doubt, it is better for a person to take a rope and
proceed in the morning to the mountains and cut the wood and then sell it,
and eat from this income and give alms from it than to ask others for
something."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 559:
Narrated Abu Humaid As-Sa'idi
We took part in the holy battle of Tabuk in the company of the Prophet and
when we arrived at the Wadi-al-Qura, there was a woman in her garden. The
Prophet asked his companions to estimate the amount of the fruits in the
garden, and Allah's Apostle estimated it at ten Awsuq (One Wasaq = 60 Sa's)
and 1 Sa'= 3 kg. approximately). The Prophet said to that lady, "Check what
your garden will yield." When we reached Tabuk, the Prophet said, "There
will be a strong wind to-night and so no one should stand and whoever has a
camel, should fasten it." So we fastened our camels. A strong wind blew at
night and a man stood up and he was blown away to a mountain called Taiy,
The King of Aila sent a white mule and a sheet for wearing to the Prophet as
a present, and wrote to the Prophet that his people would stay in their place
(and will pay Jizya taxation.) (1) When the Prophet reached Wadi-al-Qura he
asked that woman how much her garden had yielded. She said, "Ten
Awsuq," and that was what Allah's Apostle had estimated. Then the Prophet
said, "I want to reach Medina quickly, and whoever among you wants to
accompany me, should hurry up." The sub-narrator Ibn Bakkar said
something which meant: When the Prophet (p.b.u.h) saw Medina he said,
"This is Taba." And when he saw the mountain of Uhud, he said, "This
mountain loves us and we love it. Shall I tell you of the best amongst the
Ansar?" They replied in the affirmative. He said, "The family of Bani-n-Najjar,
and then the family of Bani Sa'ida or Bani Al-Harith bin Al-Khazraj. (The
above-mentioned are the best) but there is goodness in all the families of
Ansar."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 560:
Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah from his father:
The Prophet said, "On a land irrigated by rain water or by natural water
channels or if the land is wet due to a near by water channel Ushr (i.e. onetenth) is compulsory (as Zakat); and on the land irrigated by the well, half of
an Ushr (i.e. one-twentieth) is compulsory (as Zakat on the yield of the
land)."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 561:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri :
The Prophet said, "There is no Zakat on less than five Awsuq (of dates), or
on less than five camels, or on less than five Awaq of silver." (22 Yameni
Riyals Faransa).

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 562:
Narrated Abu Huraira :
Dates used to be brought to Allah's Apostle immediately after being
plucked. Different persons would bring their dates till a big heap collected
(in front of the Prophet). Once Al-Hasan and Al-Husain were playing with
these dates. One of them took a date and put it in his mouth. Allah's Apostle
looked at him and took it out from his mouth and said, "Don't you know that
Muhammad's offspring do not eat what is given in charity?"

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 563:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet had forbidden the sale of dates till they were good (ripe), and
when it was asked what it meant, the Prophet said, "Till there is no danger
of blight."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 564:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :
The Prophet had forbidden the sale of fruits till they were ripe (free from
blight).

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 565:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle forbade the selling of fruits until they were ripe. The Prophet
(p.b.u.h) added, "It means that they become red ."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 566:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Umar bin Al-Khattab gave a horse in charity in Allah's Cause and later he saw
it being sold in the market and intended to purchase it. Then he went to the
Prophet and asked his permission. The Prophet said, "Do not take back what
you have given in charity." For this reason, Ibn 'Umar never purchased the
things which he had given in charity, and in case he had purchased
something (unknowingly) he would give it in charity again.

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 567:
Narrated 'Umar:
Once I gave a horse in Allah's Cause (in charity) but that person did not take
care of it. I intended to buy it, as I thought he would sell it at a low price. So,
I asked the Prophet (p.b.u.h) about it. He said, "Neither buy, nor take back
your alms which you have given, even if the seller were willing to sell it for
one Dirham, for he who takes back his alms is like the one who swallows his
own vomit."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 568:
Narrated Abu Huraira :
Al-Hasan bin 'Ali took a date from the dates given in charity and put it in his
mouth. The Prophet said, "Expel it from your mouth. Don't you know that
we do not eat a thing which is given in charity?"

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 569:
Narrated Ibn Abbas :
The Prophet saw a dead sheep which had been given in charity to a freed
slavegirl of Maimuna, the wife of the Prophet . The Prophet said, "Why don't
you get the benefit of its hide?" They said, "It is dead." He replied, "Only to
eat (its meat) is illegal."
Volume 2, Book 24, Number 570:
Narrated Al-Aswad:
'Aisha intended to buy Barira (a slave-girl) in order to manumit her and her
masters intended to put the condition that her Al-wala would be for them.
'Aisha mentioned that to the Prophet who said to her, "Buy her, as the
"Wala" is for the manumitted." Once some meat was presented to the
Prophet and 'Aisha said to him, "This (meat) was given in charity to Barira."
He said, "It is an object of charity for Barira but a gift for us."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 571:
Narrated Um 'Atiyya Al-Ansariya :
The Prophet went to 'Aisha and asked her whether she had something (to
eat). She replied that she had nothing except the mutton (piece) which
Nusaiba (Um 'Atiyya) had sent to us (Buraira) in charity." The Prophet said,
"It has reached its place and now it is not a thing of charity but a gift for us."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 572:
Narrated Anas:
Some meat was presented to the Prophet (p.b.u.h) and it had been given to
Barira (the freed slave-girl of Aisha) in charity. He said, "This meat is a thing
of charity for Barira but it is a gift for us."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 573:
Narrated Abu Ma'bad,:
(the slave of Ibn Abbas) Allah's Apostle said to Muadh when he sent him to
Yemen, "You will go to the people of the Scripture. So, when you reach
there, invite them to testify that none has the right to be worshipped but
Allah, and that Muhammad is His Apostle. And if they obey you in that, tell
them that Allah has enjoined on them five prayers in each day and night.
And if they obey you in that tell them that Allah has made it obligatory on
them to pay the Zakat which will be taken from the rich among them and
given to the poor among them. If they obey you in that, then avoid taking
the best of their possessions, and be afraid of the curse of an oppressed
person because there is no screen between his invocation and Allah."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 574i:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Aufa :
Whenever a person came to the Prophet with his alms, the Prophet would
say, "O Allah! Send your Blessings upon so and so." My father went to the
Prophet with his alms and the Prophet said, "O Allah! Send your blessings
upon the offspring of Abu Aufa."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 574f:
Narrated Abu Huraira
The Prophet said, "A man from Bani Israel asked someone from Bani Israel
to give him a loan of one thousand Dinars and the later gave it to him. The
debtor went on a voyage (when the time for the payment of the debt
became due) but he did not find a boat, so he took a piece of wood and
bored it and put 1000 diners in it and threw it into the sea. The creditor went
out and took the piece of wood to his family to be used as fire-wood." (See
Hadith No. 488 B, Vol. 3). And the Prophet narrated the narration (and said),
"When he sawed the wood, he found his money."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 575:
Narrated Abu Huraira
Allah's Apostle said, "There is no compensation for one killed or wounded
by an animal or by falling in a well, or because of working in mines; but
Khumus is compulsory on Rikaz."

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 576:
Narrated Abu Humaid Al-Sa'idi:
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) appointed a man called Ibn Al-Lutbiya, from the
tribe of Al-Asd to collect Zakat from Bani Sulaim. When he returned, (after
collecting the Zakat) the Prophet checked the account with him.

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 577:
Narrated Anas:
Some people from 'Uraina tribe came to Medina and its climate did not suit
them, so Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) allowed them to go to the herd of camels
(given as Zakat) and they drank their milk and urine (as medicine) but they
killed the shepherd and drove away all the camels. So Allah's Apostle sent
(men) in their pursuit to catch them, and they were brought, and he had
their hands and feet cut, and their eyes were branded with heated pieces of
iron and they were left in the Harra (a stony place at Medina) biting the
stones. (See Hadith No. 234, Vol. 1)

Volume 2, Book 24, Number 578:
Narrated Anas bin Malik
took 'Abdullah bin Abu Talha to Allah's Apostle to perform Tahnik for him.
(Tahnik was a custom among the Muslims that whenever a child was born
they used to take it to the Prophet who would chew a piece of date and put
a part of its juice in the child's mouth). I saw the Prophet and he had an
instrument for branding in his hands and was branding the camels of Zakat.


BOOK 25. OBLIGATORY CHARITY TAX AFTER RAMADAAN (ZAKAT UL FITR) (579-588)
Volume 2, Book 25, Number 579:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
Allah's Apostle enjoined the payment of one Sa' of dates or one Sa' of barley
as Zakat-ul-Fitr on every Muslim slave or free, male or female, young or old,
and he ordered that it be paid before the people went out to offer the 'Id
prayer. (One Sa' = 3 Kilograms approx.)

Volume 2, Book 25, Number 580:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle made it incumbent on all the slave or free Muslims, male or
female, to pay one Sa' of dates or barley as Zakat-ul-Fitr.

Volume 2, Book 25, Number 581:
Narrated Abu Said:
We used to give one Sa' of barley as Sadaqatul-Fitr (per head).

Volume 2, Book 25, Number 582:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
We used to give one Sa' of meal or one Sa' of barley or one Sa' of dates, or
one Sa' of cottage cheese or one Sa' of Raisins (dried grapes) as Zakat-ulFitr.

Volume 2, Book 25, Number 583:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar
The Prophet ordered (Muslims) to give one Sa' of dates or one Sa' of barley
as Zakat-ul-Fitr. The people rewarded two Mudds of wheat as equal to that.

Volume 2, Book 25, Number 584:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
In the life-time of the Prophet we used to give one Sa' of food or one Sa' of
dates or one Sa' of barley or one Sa' of Raisins (dried grapes) as Sadaqat-ulFitr. And when Muawiya became the Caliph and the wheat was (available in
abundance) he said, "I think (observe) that one Mudd (of wheat) equals two
Mudds (of any of the above mentioned things).

Volume 2, Book 25, Number 585:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet ordered the people to pay Zakat-ul-Fitr before going to the 'Id
prayer.

Volume 2, Book 25, Number 586:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
In the life-time of Allah's Apostle , we used to give one Sa' of food (edible
things) as Sadaqat-ul-Fit,r (to the poor). Our food used to be either of
barley, raisins (dried grapes), cottage cheese or dates.

Volume 2, Book 25, Number 587:
Narrated Nafi':
Ibn 'Umar said, "The Prophet made incumbent on every male or female, free
man or slave, the payment of one Sa' of dates or barley as Sadaqat-ul-Fitr (or
said Sadaqa-Ramadan)." The people then substituted half Sa' of wheat for
that. Ibn 'Umar used to give dates (as Sadaqat-ulFitr). Once there was
scarcity of dates in Medina and Ibn 'Umar gave barley. 'And Ibn 'Umar used
to give Sadaqat-ul-Fitr for every young and old person. He even used to give
on behalf of my children. Ibn 'Umar used to give Sadaqatul-Fitr to those who
had been officially appointed for its collection. People used to give Sadaqatul-Fitr (even) a day or two before the 'Id.

Volume 2, Book 25, Number 588:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle has made Sadaqatul-Fitr obligatory, (and it was), either one
Sa' of barley or one Sa' of dates (and its payment was obligatory) on young
and old people, and on free men as well as on slaves.
BOOK 26. PILGRIMMAGE (HAJJ) (589-823)
Volume 2, Book 26, Number 589:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abbas :
Al-Fadl (his brother) was riding behind Allah's Apostle and a woman from
the tribe of Khath'am came and Al-Fadl started looking at her and she
started looking at him. The Prophet turned Al-Fadl's face to the other side.
The woman said, "O Allah's Apostle! The obligation of Hajj enjoined by Allah
on His devotees has become due on my father and he is old and weak, and
he cannot sit firm on the Mount; may I perform Hajj on his behalf?" The
Prophet replied, "Yes, you may." That happened during the Hajj-al-Wida (of
the Prophet ).

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 590:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
I saw that Allah's Apostle used to ride on his Mount at Dhul Hulaifa and used
to start saying, "Labbaik" when the Mount stood upright.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 591:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :
that Allah's Apostle started saying, "Labbaik" from Dhul-Hulaifa when his
Mount stood upright carrying him .

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 592:
Narrated Thumama bin 'Abdullah bin Anas:
Anas performed the Hajj on a pack-saddle and he was not a miser. Anas said,
"Allah's Apostle
performed Hajj on a pack-saddle and the same Mount was carrying his
baggage too."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 593:
Narrated Al-Qasim bin Muhammad:
'Aisha said, "O Allah's Apostle! You performed 'Umra but I did not." He said,
"O 'Abdur-Rahman! Go along with your sister and let her perform 'Umra
from Tan'im." 'Abdur-Rahman made her ride over the pack-saddle of a shecamel and she performed 'Umra.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 594:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet was asked, "Which is the best deed?" He said, "To believe in
Allah and His Apostle." He was then asked, "Which is the next (in
goodness)?" He said, "To participate in Jihad in Allah's Cause." He was then
asked, "Which is the next?" He said, "To perform Hajj-Mabrur. "

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 595:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the mother of the faithful believers) I said, "O Allah's Apostle! We consider
Jihad as the best deed." The Prophet said, "The best Jihad (for women) is
Hajj Mabrur. "

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 596:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Whoever performs Hajj for Allah's pleasure and
does not have sexual relations with his wife, and does not do evil or sins
then he will return (after Hajj free from all sins) as if he were born anew."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 597:
Narrated Zaid bin Jubair:
I went to visit 'Abdullah bin 'Umar at his house which contained many tents
made of cotton cloth and these were encircled with Suradik (part of the
tent). I asked him from where, should one assume Ihram for Umra. He said,
"Allah's Apostle had fixed as Miqat (singular of Mawaqit) Qarn for the
people of Najd, Dhul-Hulaifa for the people of Medina, and Al-Juhfa for the
people of Sham."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 598:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The people of Yemen used to come for Hajj and used not to bring enough
provisions with them and used to say that they depend on Allah. On their
arrival in Medina they used to beg the people, and so Allah revealed, "And
take a provision (with you) for the journey, but the best provision is the fear
of Allah." (2.197).

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 599:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) made Dhul-Huiaifa as the Miqat for the people of
Medina; Al-Juhfa for the people of Sham; Qarn-al-Manazil for the people of
Najd; and Yalamlam for the people of Yemen; and these Mawaqit are for the
people at those very places, and besides them for those who come
thorough those places with the intention of performing Hajj and 'Umra; and
whoever is living within these boundaries can assume lhram from the place
he starts, and the people of Mecca can assume Ihram from Mecca.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 600:
Narrated Nafi':
'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'The people of Medina
should assume lhram from Dhul-Hulaifa; the people of Sham from Al-Juhfa;
and the people of Najd from Qarn." And 'Abdullah added, "I was informed
that Allah's Apostle had said, 'The people of Yemen should assume Ihram
from Yalamlam.' "

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 601:
Narrated Ibn Abbas :
Allah's Apostle had fixed Dhul Hulaifa as the Mlqat for the people of Medina;
Al-Juhfa for the people of Sham; and Qarn Ul-Manazil for the people of Najd;
and Yalamlam for the people of Yemen. So, these (above mentioned) are
the Mawaqit for all those living at those places, and besides them for those
who come through those places with the intention of performing Hajj and
'Umra and whoever lives within these places should assume Ihram from his
dwelling place, and similarly the people of Mecca can assume lhram from
Mecca.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 602:
Narrated Salim from his father who said,:
"The Prophet had fixed the Mawaqit as follows: (No. 603)

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 603:
Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah from his father
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "The Miqat for the people of Medina is DhulHulaifa; for the people of Sham is Mahita; (i.e. Al-Juhfa); and for the people
of Najd is Qarn. And said Ibn 'Umar, "They claim, but I did not hear
personally, that the Prophet said, "The Miqat for the people of Yemen is
Yalamlam."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 604:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet fixed Dhul-Hulaifa as the Miqat for the people of Medina, AlJuhfa, for the people of Sham, Yalamlam for the people of Yemen, and Qarn
for the people of Najd. And these Mawaqlt are for those living at those very
places, and besides them for those who come through those places with the
intention of performing Hajj and Umra; and whoever is living inside these
places can assume lhram from his own dwelling place, and the people of
Mecca can assume lhram from Mecca.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 605:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) fixed Dhul-Hulaifa as the Miqat for the people of
Medina, Al-Juhfa for the people of Sham, Qarn-ul-Manazil for the people of
Najd, and Yalamlam for the people of Yemen; and these Mawaqit are for
those living at those very places, and besides them for those whom come
through them with the intention of performing Hajj and Umra; and whoever
is living within these Mawaqit should assume lhram from where he starts,
and the people of Mecca can assume Ihram from Mecca.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 606:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
When these two towns (Basra and Kufa) were captured, the people went to
'Umar and said, "O the Chief of the faithful believers! The Prophet fixed
Qarn as the Miqat for the people of Najd, it is beyond our way and it is
difficult for us to pass through it." He said, "Take as your Miqat a place
situated opposite to Qarn on your usual way. So, he fixed Dhatu-Irq (as their
Miqat)."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 607:
Narrated Nafi :
'Abdullah bin 'Umar' said, "Allah's Apostle made his camel sit (i.e. he
dismounted) at Al-Batha' in Dhul-Hulaifa and offered the prayer." 'Abdullah
bin 'Umar used to do the same.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 608:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar :
Allah's Apostle used to go (for Hajj) via Ash-Shajara way and return via
Muarras way; and no doubt, whenever Allah's Apostle went to Mecca, he
used to offer the prayer in the Mosque of Ash-Shajara; and on his return, he
used to offer the prayer at Dhul-Hulaifa in the middle of the valley, and pass
the night there till morning.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 609:
Narrated 'Umar:
In the valley of Al-'Aqiq I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "To night a messenger
came to me from my Lord and asked me to pray in this blessed valley and to
assume Ihram for Hajj and 'Umra together. "

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 610:
Narrated Musa bin 'Uqba:
Salim bin 'Abdullah's father said, "The Prophet said that while resting in the
bottom of the valley at Mu'arras in Dhul-Hulaifa, he had been addressed in a
dream: 'You are verily in a blessed valley.' " Salim made us to dismount from
our camels at the place where 'Abdullah used to dismount, aiming at the
place where Allah's Apostle had rested and it was below the Mosque
situated in the middle of the valley in between them (the residence) and the
road.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 611:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
Ibn 'Umar used to oil his hair. I told that to Ibrahim who said, "What do you
think about this statement: Narrated Aswad from 'Aisha: As if I were now
observing the glitter of the scent in the parting of the hair of the Prophet
while he was Muhrim?"

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 612:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) I used to scent Allah's Apostle when he
wanted to assume Ihram and also on finishing Ihram before the Tawaf
round the Ka'ba (Tawaf-al-ifada).

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 613:
Narrated Salim from his father:
I heard that Allah's Apostle assumed Ihram with his hair matted together.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 614:
Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah :
I heard my father saying, "Never did Allah's Apostle assume Ihram except at
the Mosque, that is, at the Mosque of Dhul-Hulaifa.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 615:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
A man asked, "O Allah's Apostle! What kind of clothes should a Muhrim
wear?" Allah's Apostle replied, "He should not wear a shirt, a turban,
trousers, a headcloak or leather socks except if he can find no slippers, he
then may wear leather socks after cutting off what might cover the ankles.
And he should not wear clothes which are scented with saffron or Wars
(kinds of Perfumes) . "

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 616:
Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah:
Ibn Abbas' said, "Usama rode behind Allah's Apostle from 'Arafat to AlMuzdalifa; and then Al-Fadl rode behind Allah's Apostle from Al-Muzdalifa to
Mina." Ibn Abbas added, "Both of them said, 'The Prophet kept on reciting
Talbiya till he did the Rami of Jamrat-al-'Aqaba.' "

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 617:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abbas:
The Prophet with his companions started from Medina after combing and
oiling his hair and putting on two sheets of lhram (upper body cover and
waist cover). He did not forbid anyone to wear any kind of sheets except the
ones colored with saffron because they may leave the scent on the skin. And
so in the early morning, the Prophet mounted his Mount while in DhulHulaifa and set out till they reached Baida', where he and his companions
recited Talbiya, and then they did the ceremony of Taqlid (which means to
put the colored garlands around the necks of the Budn (camels for
sacrifice). And all that happened on the 25th of Dhul-Qa'da. And when he
reached Mecca on the 4th of Dhul-Hijja he performed the Tawaf round the
Ka'ba and performed the Tawaf between Safa and Marwa. And as he had a
Badana and had garlanded it, he did not finish his Ihram. He proceeded
towards the highest places of Mecca near Al-Hujun and he was assuming the
Ihram for Hajj and did not go near the Ka'ba after he performed Tawaf
(round it) till he returned from 'Arafat. Then he ordered his companions to
perform the Tawaf round the Ka'ba and then the Tawaf of Safa and Marwa,
and to cut short the hair of their heads and to finish their Ihram. And that
was only for those people who had not garlanded Budn. Those who had
their wives with them were permitted to contact them (have sexual
intercourse), and similarly perfume and (ordinary) clothes were permissible
for them.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 618:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet offered four Rakat in Medina and then two Rakat at DhulI
lulaifa and then passed the night at Dhul-Hulaifa till it was morning and
when he mounted his Mount and it stood up, he started to recite Talbiya.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 619:
Narrated Abu Qilaba:
Anas bin Malik said, "The Prophet offered four Rakat of the Zuhr prayer in
Medina and two Rakat of 'Asr prayer at Dhul-Hulaifa." I think that the
Prophet passed the night there till morning.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 620:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet offered four Rakat of the Zuhr prayer in Medina and two Rakat
of the 'Asr prayer in Dhul-Hulaifa and I heard them (the companions of the
Prophet) reciting Talbiya together loudly to the extent of shouting.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 621:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar :
The Talbiya of Allah's Apostle was : 'Labbaika Allahumma labbaik, Labbaika
la sharika Laka labbaik, Inna-l-hamda wan-ni'mata Laka walmu Lk, La sharika
Laka' (I respond to Your call O Allah, I respond to Your call, and I am
obedient to Your orders, You have no partner, I respond to Your call All the
praises and blessings are for You, All the sovereignty is for You, And You
have no partners with you.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 622:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I know how the Prophet used to say (Talbiya) and it was: 'Labbaika
Allahumma Labbaik, Labbaika la sharika Laka labbaik, Inna-l-hamda wanni'mata Laka walmu Lk, La sharika Laka'.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 623:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle offered four Rakat of Zuhr prayer at Medina and we were in
his company, and two Rakat of the Asr prayer at Dhul-Hulaifa and then
passed the night there till it was dawn; then he rode, and when he reached
Al-Baida', he praised and glorified Allah and said Takbir (i.e. Alhamdu-lillah
and Subhanallah(1) and Allahu-Akbar). Then he and the people along with
him recited Talbiya with the intention of performing Hajj and Umra. When
we reached (Mecca) he ordered us to finish the lhram (after performing the
Umra) (only those who had no Hadi (animal for sacrifice) with them were
asked to do so) till the day of Tarwiya that is 8th Dhul-Hijja when they
assumed Ihram for Hajj. The Prophet sacrificed many camels (slaughtering
them) with his own hands while standing. While Allah's Apostle was in
Medina he sacrificed two horned rams black and white in color in the Name
of Allah."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 624:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) recited Talbiya when he had mounted his Mount and
was ready to set out.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 625:
Narrated Nafi':
Whenever Ibn 'Umar intended to go to Mecca he used to oil himself with a
sort of oil that had no pleasant smell, then he would go to the Mosque of AlHulaita and offer the prayer, and then ride. When he mounted well on his
Mount and the Mount stood up straight, he would proclaim the intention of
assuming Ihram, and he used to say that he had seen the Prophet doing the
same.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 626:
Narrated Mujahid:
I was in the company of Ibn Abbas and the people talked about Ad-Dajjal
and said, "Ad-Dajjal will come with the word Kafir (non-believer) written in
between his eyes." On that Ibn Abbas said, "I have not heard this from the
Prophet but I heard him saying, 'As if I saw Moses just now entering the
valley reciting Talbyia. ' "
Volume 2, Book 26, Number 627:
Narrated Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) We set out with the Prophet in his last Hajj
and we assumed Ihram for Umra. The Prophet then said, "Whoever has the
Hadi with him should assume Ihram for Hajj along with 'Umra and should
not finish the Ihram till he finishes both." I was menstruating when I reached
Mecca, and so I neither did Tawaf round the Ka'ba nor Tawaf between Safa
and Marwa. I complained about that to the Prophet on which he replied,
"Undo and comb your head hair, and assume Ihram for Hajj (only) and leave
the Umra." So, I did so. When we had performed the Hajj, the Prophet sent
me with my brother 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr to Tan'im. So I performed
the 'Umra. The Prophet said to me, "This 'Umra is instead of your missed
one." Those who had assumed Ihram for 'Umra (Hajj-atTamattu) performed
Tawaf round the Ka'ba and between Safa and Marwa and then finished their
Ihram. After returning from Mina, they performed another Tawaf (between
Safa and Marwa). Those who had assumed Ihram for Hajj and 'Umra
together (Hajj-al-Qiran) performed only one Tawaf (between Safa and
Marwa).

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 628:
Narrated Ata:
Jabir said, "The Prophet ordered Ali to keep on assuming his Ihram." The
narrator then informed about the narration of Suraqa.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 629:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Ali came to the Prophet (p.b.u.h) from Yemen (to Mecca). The Prophet
asked Ali, "With what intention have you assumed Ihram?" Ali replied, "I
have assumed Ihram with the same intention as that of the Prophet." The
Prophet said, "If I had not the Hadi with me I would have finished the
Ihram." Muhammad bin Bakr narrated extra from Ibn Juraij, "The Prophet
said to Ali, "With what intention have you assumed the Ihram, O Ali?" He
replied, "With the same (intention) as that of the Prophet." The Prophet
said, "Have a Hadi and keep your Ihram as it is."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 630:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet sent me to some people in Yemen and when I returned, I found
him at Al-Batha. He asked me, "With what intention have you assumed
Ihram (i.e. for Hajj or for Umra or for both?") I replied, "I have assumed
Ihram with an intention like that of the Prophet." He asked, "Have you a
Hadi with you?" I replied in the negative. He ordered me to perform Tawaf
round the Ka'ba and between Safa and Marwa and then to finish my Ihram. I
did so and went to a woman from my tribe who combed my hair or washed
my head. Then, when Umar came (i.e. became Caliph) he said, "If we follow
Allah's Book, it orders us to complete Hajj and Umra; as Allah says: "Perform
the Hajj and Umra for Allah." (2.196). And if we follow the tradition of the
Prophet who did not finish his Ihram till he sacrificed his Hadi."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 631:
Narrated Al-Qasim bin Muhammad:
' Aisha said, "We set out with Allah's Apostles in the months of Hajj, and (in)
the nights of Hajj, and at the time and places of Hajj and in a state of Hajj. We
dismounted at Sarif (a village six miles from Mecca). The Prophet then
addressed his companions and said, "Anyone who has not got the Hadi and
likes to do Umra instead of Hajj may do so (i.e. Hajj-al-Tamattu) and anyone
who has got the Hadi should not finish the Ihram after performing ' Umra).
(i.e. Hajj-al-Qiran). Aisha added, "The companions of the Prophet obeyed the
above (order) and some of them (i.e. who did not have Hadi) finished their
Ihram after Umra." Allah's Apostle and some of his companions were
resourceful and had the Hadi with them, they could not perform Umra
(alone) (but had to perform both Hajj and Umra with one Ihram). Aisha
added, "Allah's Apostle came to me and saw me weeping and said, "What
makes you weep, O Hantah?" I replied, "I have heard your conversation with
your companions and I cannot perform the Umra." He asked, "What is
wrong with you?' I replied, ' I do not offer the prayers (i.e. I have my
menses).' He said, ' It will not harm you for you are one of the daughters of
Adam, and Allah has written for you (this state) as He has written it for
them. Keep on with your intentions for Hajj and Allah may reward you that."
Aisha further added, "Then we proceeded for Hajj till we reached Mina and I
became clean from my menses. Then I went out from Mina and performed
Tawaf round the Ka'ba." Aisha added, "I went along with the Prophet in his
final departure (from Hajj) till he dismounted at Al-Muhassab (a valley
outside Mecca), and we too, dismounted with him." He called ' AbdurRahman bin Abu Bakr and said to him, ' Take your sister outside the
sanctuary of Mecca and let her assume Ihram for ' Umra, and when you had
finished ' Umra, return to this place and I will wait for you both till you both
return to me.' " ' Aisha added, ' ' So we went out of the sanctuary of Mecca
and after finishing from the ' Umra and the Tawaf we returned to the
Prophet at dawn. He said, 'Have you performed the ' Umra?' We replied in
the affirmative. So he announced the departure amongst his companions
and the people set out for the journey, and the Prophet: too left for
Medina.''

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 632:
Narrated Al-Aswad:
' Aisha said, We went out with the Prophet (from Medina) with the intention
of performing Hajj only and when we reached Mecca we performed Tawaf
round the Kaba and then the Prophet ordered those who had not driven the
Hadi along with them to finish their Ihram. So the people who had not
driven the Hadi along with them finished their Ihram. The Prophet's wives,
too, had not driven the Hadi with them, so they too, finished their Ihram."
'Aisha added, "I got my menses and could not perform Tawaf round the
Ka'ba." So when it was the night of Hasba (i.e. when we stopped at Al-
Muhassab), I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Everyone is returning after performing
Hajj and 'Umra but I am returning after performing Hajj only.' He said, 'Didn't
you perform Tawaf round the Ka'ba the night we reached Mecca?' I replied
in the negative. He said, 'Go with your brother to Tan'im and assume the
Ihram for'Umra, (and after performing it) come back to such and such a
place.' On that Safiya said, 'I feel that I will detain you all.' The Prophet said,
'O 'Aqra Halqa! Didn't you perform Tawaf of the Ka'ba on the day of
sacrifice? (i.e. Tawaf-al-ifada) Safiya replied in the affirmative. He said, (to
Safiya). 'There is no harm for you to proceed on with us.' " 'Aisha added,
"(after returning from 'Umra), the Prophet met me while he was ascending
(from Mecca) and I was descending to it, or I was ascending and he was
descending."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 633:
Narrated 'Aisha:
We set out with Allah's Apostles (to Mecca) in the year of the Prophet's Last
Hajj. Some of us had assumed Ihram for 'Umra only, some for both Hajj and
'Umra, and others for Hajj only. Allah's Apostle assumed Ihram for Hajj. So
whoever had assumed Ihram for Hajj or for both Hajj and 'Umra did not
finish the Ihram till the day of sacrifice. (See Hadith No. 631, 636, and 639).

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 634:
Narrated Marwan bin Al-Hakam:
I saw 'Uthman and 'Ali. 'Uthman used to forbid people to perform Hajj-atTamattu' and Hajj-al-Qiran (Hajj and 'Umra together), and when 'Ali saw (this
act of 'Uthman), he assumed Ihram for Hajj and 'Umra together saying,
"Lubbaik for 'Umra and Hajj," and said, "I will not leave the tradition of the
Prophet on the saying of somebody."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 635:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The people (of the Pre-lslamic Period) used to think that to perform 'Umra
during the months of Hajj was one of the major sins on earth. And also used
to consider the month of Safar as a forbidden (i.e. sacred) month and they
used to say, "When the wounds of the camel's back heal up (after they
return from Hajj) and the signs of those wounds vanish and the month of
Safar passes away then (at that time) 'Umra is permissible for the one who
wishes to perform it." In the morning of the 4th of Dhul-Hijja, the Prophet
and his companions reached Mecca, assuming Ihram for Hajj and he ordered
his companions to make their intentions of the Ihram for'Umra only (instead
of Hajj) so they considered his order as something great and were puzzled,
and said, "O Allah's Apostle! What kind (of finishing) of Ihram is allowed?"
The Prophet replied, "Finish the Ihram completely like a non-Muhrim (you
are allowed everything)."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 636:
Narrated Abu Musa:
came to the Prophet (from Yemen and was assuming Ihram for Hajj) and he
ordered me to finish the Ihram (after performing the 'Umra).

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 637:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Hafsa the wife of the Prophet said, "O Allah's Apostle! Why have the people
finished their Ihram after performing 'Umra but you have not finished your
Ihram after performing 'Umra?" He replied, "I have matted my hair and
garlanded my Hadi. So I will not finish my Ihram till I have slaughtered (my
Hadi). "

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 638:
Narrated Shu'ba:
Abu Jamra Nasr bin 'Imran Ad-Duba'i said, "I intended to perform Hajj-atTamattu' and the people advised me not to do so. I asked Ibn Abbas
regarding it and he ordered me to perform Hajj-at-Tammatu'. Later I saw in a
dream someone saying to me, 'Hajj-Mabrur (Hajj performed in accordance
with the Prophet's tradition without committing sins and accepted by Allah)
and an accepted 'Umra.' So I told that dream to Ibn Abbas. He said, 'This is
the tradition of Abu-l-Qasim.' Then he said to me, 'Stay with me and I shall
give you a portion of my property.' " I (Shu'ba) asked, "Why (did he invite
you)?" He (Abu Jamra) said, "Because of the dream which I had seen."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 639:
Narrated Abu Shihab:
I left for Mecca for Hajj-at-Tamattu' assuming Ihram for 'Umra. I reached
Mecca three days before the day of Tarwiya (8th Dhul-Hijja). Some people of
Mecca said to me, "Your Hajj will be like the Hajj performed by the people of
Mecca (i.e. you will lose the superiority of assuming Ihram from the Miqat).
So I went to 'Ata' asking him his view about it. He said, "Jabir bin 'Abdullah
narrated to me, 'I performed Hajj with Allah's Apostle on the day when he
drove camels with him. The people had assumed Ihram for Hajj-al-Ifrad. The
Prophet ordered them to finish their Ihram after Tawaf round the Ka'ba, and
between Safa and Marwa and to cut short their hair and then to stay there
(in Mecca) as non-Muhrims till the day of Tarwiya (i.e. 8th of Dhul-Hijja)
when they would assume Ihram for Hajj and they were ordered to make the
Ihram with which they had come as for 'Umra only. They asked, 'How can
we make it 'Umra (Tamattu') as we have intended to perform Hajj?' The
Prophet said, 'Do what I have ordered you. Had I not brought the Hadi with
me, I would have done the same, but I cannot finish my Ihram till the Hadi
reaches its destination (i.e. is slaughtered).' So, they did (what he ordered
them to do)."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 640:
Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab:
'Ali and 'Uthman differed regarding Hajj-at-Tamattu' while they were at
'Usfan (a familiar place near Mecca). 'Ali said, "I see you want to forbid
people to do a thing that the Prophet did?" When 'Ali saw that, he assumed
Ihram for both Hajj and 'Umra.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 641:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :
We came with Allah's Apostle (to Mecca) and we were saying: 'Labbaika
Allahumma Labbaik' for Hajj. Allah's Apostle ordered us to perform 'Umra
with that Ihram (instead of Hajj).

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 642:
Narrated 'Imran:
We performed Hajj-at-Tamattu' in the lifetime of Allah's Apostle and then
the Quran was revealed (regarding Hajj-at-Tamattu') and somebody said
what he wished (regarding Hajj-at-Tamattu') according his own opinion.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 643:
Narrated Nafi:
On reaching the sanctuary of Mecca, Ibn 'Umar used to stop, reciting Talbiya
and then he would pass the night at Dhi-Tuwa and then offer the Fajr prayer
and take a bath. He used to say that the Prophet used to do the same.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 644:
Narrated Nafi:
' Ibn 'Umar said, "The Prophet passed the night at Dhi-Tuwa till it was dawn
and then he entered Mecca." Ibn 'Umar used to do the same.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 645:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle used to enter Mecca from the high Thaniya and used to leave
Mecca from the low Thaniya.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 646:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle entered Mecca from Kada' from the highest Thaniya which is
at Al-Batha' and used to leave Mecca from the low Thaniya.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 647:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When the Prophet came to Mecca he entered from its higher side and left
from its lower side.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 648:
Narrated 'Aisha':
In the year of the conquest of Mecca, the Prophet entered Mecca from
Kada' and left Mecca from Kuda, from the higher part of Mecca.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 649:
Narrated 'Aisha:
In the year of the conquest of Mecca, the Prophet entered Mecca from
Kada' at the higher place of Mecca. (Hisham, a sub-narrator said, " 'Urwa
used to enter (Mecca) from both Kada' and Kuda and he often entered
through Kada' which was nearer to his dwelling place.)"

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 650:
Narrated Hisham:
'Urwa said, "The Prophet entered Mecca in the year of the conquest of
Mecca from the side of Kada' which is at the higher part of Mecca." 'Urwa
often entered from Kada' which was nearer of the two to his dwelling place.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 651:
Narrated Hisham from his father :
In the year of the conquest of Mecca, the Prophet entered Mecca from the
side of Kada. Urwa used to enter through both places and he often entered
through Kada' which was nearer of the two to his dwelling place.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 652:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
When the Ka'ba was built, the Prophet and Abbas went to bring stones (for
its construction). Al Abbas said to the Prophet, "Take off your waist sheet
and put it on your neck." (When the Prophet took it off) he fell on the
ground with his eyes open towards the sky and said, "Give me my waist
sheet." And he covered himself with it.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 653:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) that Allah's Apostle said to her, "Do you know that
when your people (Quraish) rebuilt the Ka'ba, they decreased it from its
original foundation laid by Abraham?" I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Why don't
you rebuild it on its original foundation laid by Abraham?" He replied, "Were
it not for the fact that your people are close to the pre-lslamic Period of
ignorance (i.e. they have recently become Muslims) I would have done so."
The sub-narrator, 'Abdullah (bin 'Umar ) stated: 'Aisha 'must have heard this
from Allah's Apostle for in my opinion Allah's Apostle had not placed his
hand over the two corners of the Ka'ba opposite Al-Hijr only because the
Ka'ba was not rebuilt on its original foundations laid by Abraham.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 654:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I asked the Prophet whether the round wall (near Ka'ba) was part of the
Ka'ba. The Prophet replied in the affirmative. I further said, "What is wrong
with them, why have they not included it in the building of the Ka'ba?" He
said, "Don't you see that your people (Quraish) ran short of money (so they
could not include it inside the building of Ka'ba)?" I asked, "What about its
gate? Why is it so high?" He replied, "Your people did this so as to admit into
it whomever they liked and prevent whomever they liked. Were your people
not close to the Pre-lslamic Period of ignorance (i.e. they have recently
embraced Islam) and were I not afraid that they would dislike it, surely I
would have included the (area of the) wall inside the building of the Ka'ba
and I would have lowered its gate to the level of the ground."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 655:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said to me, "Were your people not close to the Pre-lslamic
period of ignorance, I would have demolished the Ka'ba and would have
rebuilt it on its original foundations laid by Abraham (for Quraish had
curtailed its building), and I would have built a back door (too)."
Volume 2, Book 26, Number 656:
Narrated Yazid bin Ruman from 'Urwa:
'Aisha said that the Prophet said to her, "O Aisha! Were your nation not
close to the Pre-lslamic Period of Ignorance, I would have had the Ka'ba
demolished and would have included in it the portion which had been left,
and would have made it at a level with the ground and would have made
two doors for it, one towards the east and the other towards the west, and
then by doing this it would have been built on the foundations laid by
Abraham." That was what urged Ibn-Az-Zubair to demolish the Ka'ba. Jazz
said, "I saw Ibn-Az-Zubair when he demolished and rebuilt the Ka'ba and
included in it a portion of Al-Hijr (the unroofed portion of Ka'ba which is at
present in the form of a compound towards the north-west of the Ka'ba). I
saw the original foundations of Abraham which were of stones resembling
the humps of camels." So Jarir asked Yazid, "Where was the place of those
stones?" Jazz said, "I will just now show it to you." So Jarir accompanied
Yazid and entered Al-Hijr, and Jazz pointed to a place and said, "Here it is."
Jarir said, "It appeared to me about six cubits from Al-Hijr or so."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 657:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
On the Day of the Conquest of Mecca, Allah's Apostle said, "Allah has made
this town a sanctuary. Its thorny bushes should not be cut, its game should
not be chased, and its fallen things should not be picked up except by one
who would announce it publicly."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 658:
Narrated 'Usama bin Zaid:
I asked, "O Allah's Apostle! Where will you stay in Mecca? Will you stay in
your house in Mecca?" He replied, "Has 'Aqil left any property or house?"
Aqil along with Talib had inherited the property of Abu Talib. Jafar and Ali
did not inherit anything as they were Muslims and the other two were nonbelievers. 'Umar bin Al-Khattab used to say, "A believer cannot inherit
(anything from an) infidel." Ibn Shihab, (a sub-narrator) said, "They (Umar
and others) derived the above verdict from Allah's Statement: "Verily! those
who believed and Emigrated and strove with their life And property in
Allah's Cause, And those who helped (the emigrants) And gave them their
places to live in, These are (all) allies to one another." (8.72)

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 659:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
When Allah's Apostle intended to enter Mecca he said, "Our destination
tomorrow, if Allah wished, will be Khaif Bani Kinana where (the pagans) had
taken the oath of Kufr." (Against the Prophet i.e. to be loyal to heathenism
by boycotting Bani Ha shim, the Prophets folk) (See Hadith No. 221 Vol. 5)

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 660:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
On the Day of Nahr at Mina, the Prophet said, "Tomorrow we shall stay at
Khaif Bani Kinana where the pagans had taken the oath of Kufr
(heathenism)." He meant (by that place) Al-Muhassab where the Quraish
tribe and Bani Kinana concluded a contract against Bani Hashim and Bani
'Abdul-Muttalib or Bani Al-Muttalib that they would not intermarry with
them or deal with them in business until they handed over the Prophet to
them.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 661:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet;; said, "Dhus-Suwaiqa-tain (literally: One with two lean legs)
from Ethiopia will demolish the Ka'ba."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 662:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The people used to fast on 'Ashura (the tenth day of the month of
Muharram) before the fasting of Ramadan was made obligatory. And on
that day the Ka'ba used to be covered with a cover. When Allah made the
fasting of the month of Ramadan compulsory, Allah's Apostle said,
"Whoever wishes to fast (on the day of 'Ashura') may do so; and whoever
wishes to leave it can do so."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 663:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said "The people will continue performing the Hajj and 'Umra
to the Ka'ba even after the appearance of Gog and Magog."
Narrated Shu'ba extra:
The Hour (Day of Judgment) will not be established till the Hajj (to the
Ka'ba) is abandoned.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 664:
Narrated Abu Wail:
(One day) I sat along with Shaiba on the chair inside the Ka'ba. He (Shaiba)
said, "No doubt, Umar sat at this place and said, 'I intended not to leave any
yellow (i.e. gold) or white (i.e. silver) (inside the Ka'ba) undistributed.' I said
(to 'Umar), 'But your two companions (i.e. The Prophet and Abu Bakr) did
not do so.' 'Umar said, They are the two persons whom I always follow.' "
Volume 2, Book 26, Number 665:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet said, "As if I were looking at him, a black person with thin legs
plucking the stones of the Ka'ba one after another. "

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 666:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "DhusSuwaiqatain (the thin legged man) from Ethiopia
will demolish the Ka'ba."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 667:
Narrated 'Abis bin Rabia:
'Umar came near the Black Stone and kissed it and said "No doubt, I know
that you are a stone and can neither benefit anyone nor harm anyone. Had I
not seen Allah's Apostle kissing you I would not have kissed you."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 668:
Narrated Salim that his father said,
"Allah's Apostle, Usama bin Zaid, Bilal, and 'Uthman bin abu Talha entered
the Ka'ba and then closed its door. When they opened the door I was the
first person to enter (the Ka'ba). I met Bilal and asked him, "Did Allah's
Apostle offer a prayer inside (the Ka'ba)?" Bilal replied in the affirmative and
said, "(The Prophet offered the prayer) in between the two right pillars."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 669:
Narrated Nafi':
Whenever Ibn 'Umar entered the Ka'ba he used to walk straight keeping the
door at his back on entering, and used to proceed on till about three cubits
from the wall in front of him, and then he would offer the prayer there
aiming at the place where Allah's Apostle prayed, as Bilal had told him.
There is no harm for any person to offer the prayer at any place inside the
Ka'ba.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 670:
Narrated Isma'li bin Abu Khalid:
'Abdullah bin Abu Aufa said, "Allah's Apostle performed the 'Umra. He
performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba and offered two Rakat behind the Maqam
(Abraham's place) and was accompanied by those who were screening him
from the people." Somebody asked 'Abdullah, "Did Allah's Apostle enter the
Ka'ba?" 'Abdullah replied in the negative.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 671:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
When Allah's Apostle came to Mecca, he refused to enter the Ka'ba with
idols in it. He ordered (idols to be taken out). So they were taken out. The
people took out the pictures of Abraham and Ishmael holding Azlams in
their hands. Allah's Apostle said, "May Allah curse these people. By Allah,
both Abraham and Ishmael never did the game of chance with Azlams."
Then he entered the Ka'ba and said Takbir at its corners but did not offer the
prayer in it.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 672:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
When Allah's Apostle and his companions came to Mecca, the pagans
circulated the news that a group of people were coming to them and they
had been weakened by the Fever of Yathrib (Medina). So the Prophet
ordered his companions to do Ramal in the first three rounds of Tawaf of
the Ka'ba and to walk between the two corners (The Black Stone and
Yemenite corner). The Prophet did not order them to do Ramal in all the
rounds of Tawaf out of pity for them.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 673:
Narrated Salim that his father said:
I saw Allah's Apostle arriving at Mecca; he kissed the Black Stone Corner first
while doing Tawaf and did ramal in the first three rounds of the seven
rounds (of Tawaf).

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 674:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar :
The Prophet did Ramal in (first) three rounds (of Tawaf), and walked in the
remaining four, in Hajj and Umra.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 675:
Narrated Zaid bin Aslam from his father who said:
"Umar bin Al-Khattab addressed the Corner (Black Stone) saying, 'By Allah! I
know that you are a stone and can neither benefit nor harm. Had I not seen
the Prophet touching (and kissing) you, I would never have touched (and
kissed) you.' Then he kissed it and said, 'There is no reason for us to do
Ramal (in Tawaf) except that we wanted to show off before the pagans, and
now Allah has destroyed them.' 'Umar added, '(Nevertheless), the Prophet
did that and we do not want to leave it (i.e. Ramal).'

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 676:
Narrated Nafi':
Ibn 'Umar. said, "I have never missed the touching of these two stones of
Ka'ba (the Black Stone and the Yemenite Corner) both in the presence and
the absence of crowds, since I saw the Prophet touching them." I asked
Nafi': "Did Ibn 'Umar use to walk between the two Corners?" Nafi' replied,
"He used to walk in order that it might be easy for him to touch it (the
Corner Stone)."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 677:
Narrated Ibn Abbas.:
In his Last Hajj the Prophet performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba riding a camel and
pointed a bent-headed stick towards the Corner (Black Stone).

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 678:
Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah that his father said:
"I have not seen the Prophet touching except the two Yemenite Corners
(i.e. the ones facing Yemen)."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 679:
Narrated Zaid bin Aslam that his father said:
"I saw 'Umar bin Al-Khattab kissing the Black Stone and he then said, (to it)
'Had I not seen Allah's Apostle kissing you, (stone) I would not have kissed
you.' "

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 680:
Narrated Az-Zubair bin 'Arabi:
A man asked Ibn 'Umar about the touching of the Black Stone. Ibn 'Umar
said, "I saw Allah's Apostle touching and kissing it." The questioner said,
"But if there were a throng (much rush) round the Ka'ba and the people
overpowered me, (what would I do?)" He replied angrily, "Stay in Yemen (as
that man was from Yemen). I saw Allah's Apostle touching and kissing it."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 681:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba while riding a camel, and
whenever he came in front of the Corner, he pointed towards it (with
something).

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 682:
Narrated Ibn Abbas
The Prophet performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba riding a camel, and every time he
came in front of the Corner (having the Black Stone), he pointed towards it
with something he had with him and said Takbir.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 683:
Narrated 'Urwa:
'Aisha said, "The first thing the Prophet did on reaching Mecca, was the
ablution and then he performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba and that was not 'Umra
(alone), (but Hajj-al-Qiran). 'Urwa added: Later Abu Bakr and 'Umar did the
same in their Hajj." And I performed the Hajj with my father Az-Zubair, and
the first thing he did was Tawaf of the Ka'ba. Later I saw the Muhajirin
(Emigrants) and the Ansar doing the same. My mother (Asma') told me that
she, her sister ('Aisha), Az-Zubair and such and such persons assumed Ihram
for 'Umra, and after they passed their hands over the Black Stone Corner (of
the Ka'ba) they finished the Ihram. (i.e. After doing Tawaf of the Ka'ba and
Sa'i between Safa-Marwa.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 684:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar :
When Allah's Apostle performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba for Hajj or 'Umra, he
used to do Ramal during the first three rounds, and in the last four rounds
he used to walk; then after the Tawaf he used to offer two Rakat and then
performed Tawaf between Safa and Marwa.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 685:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
When the Prophet performed the Tawaf of the Ka'ba, he did Ramal during
the first three rounds and in the last four rounds he used to walk and while
doing Tawaf between Safa and Marwa, he used to run in the midst of the
rain water passage.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 686:
Narrated Um Salama:
(the wife of the Prophet) I informed Allah's Apostle that I was ill. So he said,
"Perform the Tawaf while riding behind the people." I did so, and at that
time the Prophet was praying beside the Ka'ba and reciting Surat-at-Tur.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 687:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
While the Prophet was performing Tawaf of the Kaba, he passed by a
person who had tied his hands to another person with a rope or string or
something like that. The Prophet cut it with his own hands and said, "Lead
him by the hand."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 688:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet saw a man performing Tawaf of the Kaba tied with a string or
something else. So the Prophet cut that string.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 689:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
In the year prior to the last Hajj of the Prophet when Allahs Apostle made
Abu Bakr the leader of the pilgrims, the latter (Abu Bakr) sent me in the
company of a group of people to make a public announcement: 'No pagan is
allowed to perform Hajj after this year, and no naked person is allowed to
perform Tawaf of the Kaba.' (See Hadith No. 365 Vol. 1)

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 690:
Narrated Amr:
We asked Ibn Umar: "May a man have sexual relations with his wife during
the Umra before performing Tawaf between Safa and Marwa?" He said,
"Allah's Apostle arrived (in Mecca) and circumambulated the Kaba seven
times, then offered two Rakat behind Maqam Ibrahim (the station of
Abraham), then performed Tawaf between Safa and Marwa." Ibn Umar
added, "Verily! In Allah's Apostle you have a good example." And I asked
Jabir bin Abdullah (the same question), and he replied, "You should not go
near your wives (have sexual relations) till you have finished Tawaf between
Safa and Marwa. "
Volume 2, Book 26, Number 691:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet arrived at Mecca and performed Tawaf of the Kaba and Sa'i
between Safa and Marwa, but he did not go near the Kaba after his Tawaf
till he returned from Arafat.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 692:
Narrated Um Salama:
(the wife of the Prophet) I informed Allah's Apostle (about my illness).
(Through other sub-narrators, Um Salama narrated that when Allah's
Apostle was at Mecca and had just decided to leave (Mecca) while she had
not yet done Tawaf of the Kaba (and after listening to her). The Prophet
said, "When the morning prayer is established, perform the Tawaf on your
camel while the people are in prayer." So she did the same and did not offer
the two Rakat of Tawaf until she came out of the Mosque.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 693:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
The Prophet reached Mecca, circumambulated the Kaba seven times and
then offered a two Rakat prayer behind Maqam ibrahim. Then he went
towards the Safa. Allah has said, "Verily, in Allah's Apostle you have a good
example."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 694:
Narrated Urwa from Aisha:
Some people performed Tawaf (of the Kaba) after the morning prayer and
then sat to listen to a preacher till sunrise, and then they stood up for the
prayer. Then Aisha commented, "Those people kept on sitting till it was the
time in which the prayer is disliked and after that they stood up for the
prayer."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 695:
Narrated Abdullah:
heard the Prophet forbidding the offering of prayers at the time of sunrise
and sunset.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 696:
Narrated Abida bin Humaid:
Abdul, Aziz bin Rufai Said, "I saw Abdullah bin Az-Zubair performing Tawaf
of the Kaba after the morning prayer then offering the two Rakat prayer."
Abdul Aziz added, "I saw Abdullah bin Az-Zubair offering a two Rakat prayer
after the Asr prayer." He informed me that Aisha told him that the Prophet
used to offer those two Rakat whenever he entered her house."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 697:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Allah's Apostle performed Tawaf (of the Kaba) ending a camel (at that time
the Prophet had foot injury). Whenever he came to the Corner (having the
Black Stone) he would point out towards it with a thing in his hand and say,
"Allahu-Akbar."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 698:
Narrated Um Salama:
I informed Allah's Apostle that I was sick. He said, "Perform Tawaf (of the
Kaba) while riding behind the people." So, I performed the Tawaf while
Allah's Apostle was offering the prayer beside the Kaba and was reciting
Surat-at-Tur.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 699:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
Al Abbas bin Abdul-Muttalib asked the permission of Allahs Apostle to let
him stay in Mecca during the nights of Mina in order to provide the pilgrims
with water to drink, so the Prophet permitted him.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 700:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Allah's Apostle came to the drinking place and asked for water. Al-Abbas
said, "O Fadl! Go to your mother and bring water from her for Allah's
Apostle ." Allah's Apostle said, "Give me water to drink." Al-Abbas said, "O
Allahs Apostle! The people put their hands in it." Allah's Apostle again said,
'Give me water to drink. So, he drank from that water and then went to the
Zam-zam (well) and there the people were offering water to the others and
working at it (drawing water from the well). The Prophet then said to them,
"Carry on! You are doing a good deed." Then he said, "Were I not afraid that
other people would compete with you (in drawing water from Zam-zam), I
would certainly take the rope and put it over this (i.e. his shoulder) (to draw
water)." On saying that the Prophet pointed to his shoulder.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 701:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
I gave Zam-zam water to Allah's Apostle and he drank it while standing. 'Asia
(a sub-narrator) said that 'Ikrima took the oath that on that day the Prophet
had not been standing but riding a camel.
Volume 2, Book 26, Number 702:
Narrated 'Aisha:
We set out with Allah's Apostle in the year of his Last Hajj and we mended
(the Ihram) for 'Umra. Then the Prophet said, "Whoever has a Hadi with him
should assume Ihram for both Hajj and 'Umra, and should not finish it till he
performs both of the them (Hajj and 'Umra)." When we reached Mecca, I
had my menses. When we had performed our Hajj, the Prophet sent me
with 'Abdur-Rahman to Tan'im and I performed the 'Umra. The Prophet
said, "This is in lieu of your missed 'Umra." Those who had assumed Ihram
for 'Umra performed Tawaf (between Safa and Marwa) and then finished
their Ihram. And then they performed another Tawaf (between Safa and
Marwa) after returning from Mina. And those who had assumed lhram for
Hajj and 'Umra to get her ( Hajj-Qiran ) performed only one Tawaf (between
Safa and Marwa).

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 703:
Narrated Nafi':
'Abdullah bin 'Abdullah bin 'Umar and his riding animal entered the house of
Ibn 'Umar. He (the son of Ibn 'Umar) said, "I fear that this year a battle
might take place between the people and you might be prevented from
going to the Ka'ba. I suggest that you should stay here." Ibn Umar said,
"Once Allah's Apostle set out for the pilgrimage, and the pagans of Quraish
intervened between him and the Ka'ba. So, if the people intervened
between me and the Ka'ba, I would do the same as Allah's Apostle had done
. . . "Verily, in Allah's Apostle you have a good example." Then he added, "I
make you a witness that I have intended to perform Hajj along with 'Umra."
After arriving at Mecca, Ibn 'Umar performed one Tawaf only (between Safa
and Marwa).

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 704:
Narrated Nafi':
Ibn 'Umar intended to perform Hajj in the year when Al-Hajjaj attacked Ibn
Az-Zubair. Somebody said to Ibn 'Umar, "There is a danger of an impending
war between them." Ibn 'Umar said, "Verily, in Allah's Apostle you have a
good example. (And if it happened as you say) then I would do the same as
Allah's Apostle had done. I make you witness that I have decided to perform
'Umra." Then he set out and when he reached Al-Baida', he said, "The
ceremonies of both Hajj and 'Umra are similar. I make you witness that I
have made Hajj compulsory for me along with 'Umra." He drove (to Mecca)
a Hadi which he had bought from (a place called) Qudaid and did not do
more than that. He did not slaughter the Hadi or finish his Ihram, or shave or
cut short his hair till the day of slaughtering the sacrifices (10th Dhul-Hijja).
Then he slaughtered his Hadi and shaved his head and considered the first
Tawaf (of Safa and Marwa) as sufficient for Hajj and 'Umra. Ibn 'Umar said,
"Allah's Apostle did the same."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 705:
Narrated Muhammad bin 'AbdurRahman bin Nawfal Al-Qurashi:
I asked 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair (regarding the Hajj of the Prophet ). 'Urwa
replied, "Aisha narrated, 'When the Prophet reached Mecca, the first thing
he started with was the ablution, then he performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba and
his intention was not 'Umra alone (but Hajj and 'Umra together).' " Later
Abu Bakr I performed the Hajj and the first thing he started with was Tawaf
of the Ka'ba and it was not 'Umra alone (but Hajj and 'Umra together). And
then 'Umar did the same. Then 'Uthman performed the Hajj and the first
thing he started with was Tawaf of the Ka'ba and it was not 'Umra alone.
And then Muawiya and 'Abdullah bin 'Umar did the same. I performed Hajj
with Ibn Az-Zubair and the first thing he started with was Tawaf of the Ka'ba
and it was not 'Umra alone, (but Hajj and 'Umra together). Then I saw the
Muhajirin (Emigrants) and Ansar doing the same and it was not 'Umra alone.
And the last person I saw doing the same was Ibn 'Umar, and he did not do
another 'Umra after finishing the first. Now here is Ibn 'Umar present
amongst the people! They neither ask him nor anyone of the previous ones.
And all these people, on entering Mecca, would not start with anything
unless they had performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba, and would not finish their
Ihram. And no doubt, I saw my mother and my aunt, on entering Mecca
doing nothing before performing Tawaf of the Ka'ba, and they would not
finish their lhram. And my mother informed me that she, her sister, AzZubair and such and such persons had assumed lhram for 'Umra and after
passing their hands over the Corner (the Black Stone) (i.e. finishing their
Umra) they finished their Ihram."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 706:
Narrated 'Urwa:
I asked 'Aisha : "How do you interpret the statement of Allah,. : Verily! (the
mountains) As-Safa and Al-Marwa are among the symbols of Allah, and
whoever performs the Hajj to the Ka'ba or performs 'Umra, it is not harmful
for him to perform Tawaf between them (Safa and Marwa.) (2.158). By Allah!
(it is evident from this revelation) there is no harm if one does not perform
Tawaf between Safa and Marwa." 'Aisha said, "O, my nephew! Your
interpretation is not true. Had this interpretation of yours been correct, the
statement of Allah should have been, 'It is not harmful for him if he does not
perform Tawaf between them.' But in fact, this divine inspiration was
revealed concerning the Ansar who used to assume lhram for worship ping
an idol called "Manat" which they used to worship at a place called AlMushallal before they embraced Islam, and whoever assumed Ihram (for the
idol), would consider it not right to perform Tawaf between Safa and
Marwa.
When they embraced Islam, they asked Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) regarding it,
saying, "O Allah's Apostle! We used to refrain from Tawaf between Safa and
Marwa." So Allah revealed: 'Verily; (the mountains) As-Safa and Al-Marwa
are among the symbols of Allah.' " Aisha added, "Surely, Allah's Apostle set
the tradition of Tawaf between Safa and Marwa, so nobody is allowed to
omit the Tawaf between them." Later on I ('Urwa) told Abu Bakr bin 'AbdurRahman (of 'Aisha's narration) and he said, 'i have not heard of such
information, but I heard learned men saying that all the people, except
those whom 'Aisha mentioned and who used to assume lhram for the sake
of Manat, used to perform Tawaf between Safa and Marwa.
When Allah referred to the Tawaf of the Ka'ba and did not mention Safa and
Marwa in the Quran, the people asked, 'O Allah's Apostle! We used to
perform Tawaf between Safa and Marwa and Allah has revealed (the verses
concerning) Tawaf of the Ka'ba and has not mentioned Safa and Marwa. Is
there any harm if we perform Tawaf between Safa and Marwa?' So Allah
revealed: "Verily As-Safa and Al-Marwa are among the symbols of Allah."
Abu Bakr said, "It seems that this verse was revealed concerning the two
groups, those who used to refrain from Tawaf between Safa and Marwa in
the Pre-lslamic Period of ignorance and those who used to perform the
Tawaf then, and after embracing Islam they refrained from the Tawaf
between them as Allah had enjoined Tawaf of the Ka'ba and did not
mention Tawaf (of Safa and Marwa) till later after mentioning the Tawaf of
the Ka'ba.'

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 707:
Narrated Nafi':
Ibn 'Umar said, "When Allah's Apostle performed the first Tawaf he did
Ramal in the first three rounds and then walked in the remaining four
rounds (of Tawaf of the Ka'ba), where as in performing Tawaf between Safa
and Marwa he used to run in the midst of the rain-water passage," I asked
Nafi', "Did 'Abdullah (bin 'Umar) use to walk steadily on reaching the
Yemenite Corner?" He replied, "No, unless people were crowded at the
Corner; otherwise he would not leave it without touching it."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 708:
Narrated 'Amr bin Dinar:
We asked Ibn 'Umar whether a man who, while performing 'Umra, had
performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba; and had not yet performed Tawaf between
Safa and Marwa, could have sexual relation with his wife, Ibn 'Umar replied
"The Prophet (p.b.u.h) reached Mecca and performed the seven rounds (of
Tawaf) of the Ka'ba and then offered a two-Rakat prayer behind Maqam
ibrahim and then performed the seven rounds (of Tawaf) between Safa and
Marwa." He added, "Verily! In Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) you have a good
example." We asked Jabir bin 'Abdullah (the same question) and he said,
"He (that man) should not come near (his wife) till he has completed Tawaf
between Safa and Marwa."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 709:
Narrated 'Amr bin Dinar:
I heard Ibn 'Umar saying, "The Prophet arrived at Mecca and performed
Tawaf of the Ka'ba and then offered a two-Rakat prayer and then
performed Tawaf between Safa and Marwa." Ibn 'Umar then recited (the
verse): "Verily! In Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) you have a good example. "

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 710:
Narrated 'Asim:
I asked Anas bin Malik: "Did you use to dislike to perform Tawaf between
Safa and Marwa?" He said, "Yes, as it was of the ceremonies of the days of
the Pre-lslamic period of ignorance, till Allah revealed: 'Verily! (The two
mountains) As-Safa and Al-Marwa are among the symbols of Allah. It is
therefore no sin for him who performs the pilgrimage to the Ka'ba, or
performs 'Umra, to perform Tawaf between them.' " (2.158)

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 711:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Allah's Apostle performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba and the Sa'i of Safa and
Marwa so as to show his strength to the pagans.
Volume 2, Book 26, Number 712:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I was menstruating when I reached Mecca. So, I neither performed Tawaf of
the Ka'ba, nor the Tawaf between Safa and Marwa. Then I informed Allah's
Apostle about it. He replied, "Perform all the ceremonies of Hajj like the
other pilgrims, but do not perform Tawaf of the Ka'ba till you get clean
(from your menses)."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 713:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet and his companions assumed Ihram for Hajj and none except
the Prophet (p.b.u.h) and Talha had the Hadi (sacrifice) with them. 'Ali
arrived from Yemen and had a Hadi with him. 'Ali said, "I have assumed
Ihram for what the Prophet has done." The Prophet ordered his companions
to perform the 'Umra with the lhram which they had assumed, and after
finishing Tawaf (of Ka'ba, Safa and Marwa) to cut short their hair, and to
finish their lhram except those who had Hadi with them. They (the people)
said, "How can we proceed to Mina (for Hajj) after having sexual relations
with our wives?" When that news reached the Prophet he said, "If I had
formerly known what I came to know lately, I would not have brought the
Hadi with me. Had there been no Hadi with me, I would have finished the
state of lhram." 'Aisha got her menses, so she performed all the ceremonies
of Hajj except Tawaf of the Ka'ba, and when she got clean (from her
menses), she performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba. She said, "O Allah's Apostle!
(All of you) are returning with the Hajj and 'Umra, but I am returning after
performing Hajj only." So the Prophet ordered 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr
to accompany her to Tan'im and thus she performed the 'Umra after the
Hajj.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 714:
Narrated Hafsa:
(On 'Id) We used to forbid our virgins to go out (for 'Id prayer). A lady came
and stayed at the Palace of Bani Khalaf. She mentioned that her sister was
married to one of the companions of Allah's Apostle who participated in
twelve Ghazawats along with Allah's Apostle and her sister was with him in
six of them. She said, "We used to dress the wounded and look after the
patients." She (her sister) asked Allah's Apostle , "Is there any harm for a
woman to stay at home if she doesn't have a veil?" He said, "She should
cover herself with the veil of her companion and she should take part in the
good deeds and in the religious gatherings of the believers." When Um
'Atiyya came, I asked her. "Did you hear anything about that?" Um 'Atiyya
said, "Bi Abi" and she never mentioned the name of Allah's Apostle without
saying "Bi Abi" (i.e. 'Let my father be sacrificed for you'). We asked her,
"Have you heard Allah's Apostle saying so and so (about women)?" She
replied in the affirmative and said, "Let my father be sacrificed for him. He
told us that unmarried mature virgins who stay often screened or unmarried
young virgins and mature girls who stay often screened should come out
and take part in the good deeds and in the religious gatherings of the
believers. But the menstruating women should keep away from the Musalla
(praying place)." I asked her, "The menstruating women?" She replied,
"Don't they present themselves at 'Arafat and at such and such places?"

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 715:
Narrated 'Abdul 'Aziz bin Rufai:
I asked Anas bin Malik, "Tell me what you remember from Allah's Apostle
(regarding these questions): Where did he offer the Zuhr and 'Asr prayers
on the day of Tarwiya (8th day of Dhul-Hajja)?" He relied, "(He offered these
prayers) at Mina." I asked, "Where did he offer the 'Asr prayer on the day of
Nafr (i.e. departure from Mina on the 12th or 13th of Dhul-Hijja)?" He replied,
"At Al-Abtah," and then added, "You should do as your chiefs do."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 716:
Narrated 'Abdul 'Aziz:
I went out to Mina on the day of Tarwiya and met Anas going on a donkey. I
asked him, "Where did the Prophet offer the Zuhr prayer on this day?" Anas
replied, "See where your chiefs pray and pray similarly."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 717:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar :
Allah's Apostle offered a two-Rakat prayer at Mina. Abu Bakr, 'Umar and
'Uthman, (during the early years of his caliphate) followed the same
practice.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 718:
Narrated Haritha bin Wahab Al-Khuza'i:
The Prophet led us in a two-Rakat prayer at Mina although our number was
more than ever and we were in better security than ever.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 719:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Masud:
I offered (only a) two Rakat prayer with the Prophet (at Mina), and similarly
with Abu Bakr and with 'Umar, and then you d offered in opinions. Wish that
I would be lucky enough to have two of the four Rakat accepted (by Allah).

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 720:
Narrated Um Al-Fadl:
The people doubted whether the Prophet was observing the fast on the Day
of 'Arafat, so I sent something for him to drink and he drank it.
Volume 2, Book 26, Number 721:
Narrated Muhammad bin Abu Bakr Al-Thaqafi:
I asked Anas bin Malik while we were proceeding from Mina to 'Arafat,
"What do you use to do on this day when you were with Allah's Apostle ?"
Anas said, "Some of us used to recite Talbiya and nobody objected to that,
and others used to recite Takbir and nobody objected to that."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 722:
Narrated Salim:
'Abdul Malik wrote to Al-Hajjaj that he should not differ from Ibn 'Umar
during Hajj. On the Day of 'Arafat, when the sun declined at midday, Ibn
'Umar came along with me and shouted near Al-Hajjaj's cotton (cloth) tent.
Al-Hajjaj came Out, wrapping himself with a waist-sheet dyed with safflower,
and said, "O Abu Abdur-Rahman! What is the matter?" He said, If you want
to follow the Sunna (the tradition of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) ) then proceed
(to 'Arafat)." Al-Hajjaj asked, "At this very hour?" Ibn 'Umar said, "Yes." He
replied, "Please wait for me till I pour some water over my head (i.e. take a
bath) and come out." Then Ibn 'Umar dismounted and waited till Al-Hajjaj
came out. So, he (Al-Hajjaj) walked in between me and my father (Ibn
'Umar). I said to him, "If you want to follow the Sunna then deliver a brief
sermon and hurry up for the stay at 'Arafat." He started looking at 'Abdullah
(Ibn 'Umar) (inquiringly), and when 'Abdullah noticed that, he said that he
had told the truth.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 723:
Narrated Um Al-Fadl bint Al Harith:
On the day of 'Arafat, some people who were with me, differed about the
fasting of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) some said that he was fasting while others
said that he was not fasting. So I sent a bowl full of milk to him while he was
riding his camel, and he drank that milk.
Volume 2, Book 26, Number 724:
Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
'Abdul-Malik bin Marwan wrote to Al-Hajjaj that he should follow 'Abdullah
bin 'Umar in all the ceremonies of Hajj. So when it was the Day of 'Arafat
(9th of Dhul-Hajja), and after the sun has deviated or has declined from the
middle of the sky, I and Ibn 'Umar came and he shouted near the cotton
(cloth) tent of Al-Hajjaj, "Where is he?" Al-Hajjaj came out. Ibn 'Umar said,
"Let us proceed (to 'Arafat)." Al-Hajjaj asked, "Just now?" Ibn 'Umar replied,
"Yes." Al-Hajjaj said, "Wait for me till I pour water on me (i.e. take a bath)."
So, Ibn 'Umar dismounted (and waited) till Al-Hajjaj came out. He was
walking between me and my father. I informed Al-Hajjaj, "If you want to
follow the Sunna today, then you should shorten the sermon and then hurry
up for the stay (at 'Arafat)." Ibn 'Umar said, "He (Salim) has spoken the
truth."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 725:
Narrated Muhammad bin Jubair bin Mut'im:
My father said, "(Before Islam) I was looking for my camel .." The same
narration is told by a different sub-narrator. Jubair bin Mut'im said, "My
camel was lost and I went out in search of it on the day of 'Arafat, and I saw
the Prophet standing in 'Arafat. I said to myself: By Allah he is from the
Hums (literally: strictly religious, Quraish were called so, as they used to say,
'We are the people of Allah we shall not go out of the sanctuary). What has
brought him here?"

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 726:
Narrated 'Urwa:
During the pre-lslamic period of Ignorance, the people used to perform
Tawaf of the Ka'ba naked except the Hums; and the Hums were Quraish and
their offspring. The Hums used to give clothes to the men who would
perform the Tawaf wearing them; and women (of the Hums) used to give
clothes to the women who would perform the Tawaf wearing them. Those
to whom the Hums did not give clothes would perform Tawaf round the
Ka'ba naked. Most of the people used to go away (disperse) directly from
'Arafat but they (Hums) used to depart after staying at Al-Muzdalifa. 'Urwa
added, "My father narrated that 'Aisha had said, 'The following verses were
revealed about the Hums: Then depart from the place whence all the people
depart--(2.199) 'Urwa added, "They (the Hums) used to stay at Al-Muzdalifa
and used to depart from there (to Mina) and so they were sent to 'Arafat
(by Allah's order)."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 727:
Narrated 'Urwa:
Usama was asked in my presence, "How was the speed of (the camel of)
Allah's Apostle while departing from 'Arafat during the Hajjatul Wada?"
Usama replied, "The Prophet proceeded on with a modest pace, and when
there was enough space he would (make his camel) go very fast."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 728:
Narrated Usama bin Zaid:
As soon as the Prophet departed from 'Arafat, he went towards the
mountain pass, and there he answered the call of) the prayer is ahead of you
(i.e. at asked, "O Allah's Apostle! Will you offer the prayer here?" He replied,
"(The place of) the prayer is ahead of you (i.e. at Al-Muzdalifa)."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 729:
Narrated Nafi':
'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to offer the Maghrib and 'Isha' prayers together at
Jam' (Al-Muzdalifa). But he used to pass by that mountain pass where
Allah's Apostle went, and he would enter it and answer the call of nature
and perform ablution, and would not offer any prayer till he had prayed at
Jam.'

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 730:
Narrated Usama bin Zaid
rode behind Allah's Apostle from 'Arafat and when Allah's Apostle reached
the mountain pass on the left side which is before Al-Muzdalifa he made his
camel kneel and then urinated, and then I poured water for his ablution. He
performed light ablution and then I said to him: (Is it the time for) the
prayer, O Allah's Apostle!" He replied, "The (place of) prayer is ahead of you
(i.e. at Al-Muzdalifa)." So Allah's Apostle rode till he reached Al-Muzdalifa
and then he offered the prayer (there) . Then in the morning (10th DhulHijja) Al-Faql (bin Abbas) rode behind Allah's Apostle. Kuraib, (a subnarrator) said that 'Abdullah bin Abbas narrated from Al-Fadl, "Allah's
Apostle (p.b.u.h) kept on reciting Talbiya (during the journey) till he reached
the Jamra." (Jamrat-al-Aqaba)

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 731:
Narrated Ibn Abbas. :
I proceeded along with the Prophet on the day of 'Arafat (9th Dhul-Hijja).
The Prophet heard a great hue and cry and the beating of camels behind
him. So he beckoned to the people with his lash, "O people! Be quiet.
Hastening is not a sign of righteousness."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 732:
Narrated Usama bin Zaid:
Allah's Apostle proceeded from 'Arafat and dismounted at the mountainous
pass and then urinated and performed a light ablution. I said to him, "(Shall
we offer) the prayer?" He replied, "The prayer is ahead of you (i.e. at AlMuzdalifa)." When he came to Al-Muzdalifa, he performed a perfect
ablution. Then Iqama for the prayer was pronounced and he offended the
Maghrib prayer and then every person made his camel kneel at his place;
and then Iqama for the prayer was pronounced and he offered the ('Isha')
prayer and he did not offer any prayer in between them (i.e. Maghrib and
'Isha' prayers).

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 733:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet offered the Maghrib and 'Isha' prayers together at Jam' (i.e. AlMuzdalifa) with a separate Iqama for each of them and did not offer any
optional prayer in between them or after each of them.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 734:
Narrated Abu Aiyub Al-Ansari :
Allah's Apostle coffered the Maghrib and 'Isha' prayers together at AlMuzdalifa.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 735:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid:
'Abdullah;- performed the Hajj and we reached Al-Muzdalifa at or about the
time of the 'Isha' prayer. He ordered a man to pronounce the Adhan and
Iqama and then he offered the Maghrib prayer and offered two Rakat after
it. Then he asked for his supper and took it, and then, I think, he ordered a
man to pronounce the Adhan and Iqama (for the 'isha' prayer). ('Amr, a subnarrator said: The intervening statement 'I think', was said by the sub-
narrator Zuhair) (i.e. not by 'Abdu-Rahman). Then 'Abdullah offered two
Rakat of 'Isha' prayer. When the day dawned, 'Abdullah said, "The Prophet
never offered any prayer at this hour except this prayer at this time and at
this place and on this day." 'Abdullah added, "These two prayers are shifted
from their actual times -- the Maghrib prayer (is offered) when the people
reached Al-Muzdalifa and the Fajr (morning) prayer at the early dawn."
'Abdullah added, "I saw the Prophet doing that."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 736:
Narrated Salim:
'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to send the weak among his family early to Mina.
So they used to depart from Al-Mash'ar Al-Haram (that is Al-Muzdalifa) at
night (when the moon had set) and invoke Allah as much as they could, and
then they would return (to Mina) before the Imam had started from AlMuzdalifa to Mina. So some of them would reach Mina at the time of the
Fajr prayer and some of them would come later. When they reached Mina
they would throw pebbles on the Jamra (Jamrat-al-Aqaba) Ibn 'Umar used
to say, "Allah's Apostle gave the permission to them (weak people) to do
so."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 737:
Narrated Ibn Abbas :
Allah's Apostle had sent me from Jam' (i.e. Al-Muzdalifa) at night.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 738:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
I as among those whom the Prophet sent on the night of Al-Muzdalifa early
being among the weak members of his family.
Volume 2, Book 26, Number 739:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
(the slave of Asma') During the night of Jam', Asma' got down at AlMuzdalifa and stood up for (offering) the prayer and offered the prayer for
some time and then asked, "O my son! Has the moon set?" I replied in the
negative and she again prayed for another period and then asked, "Has the
moon set?" I replied, "Yes." So she said that we should set out (for Mina),
and we departed and went on till she threw pebbles at the Jamra (Jamrat-alAqaba) and then she returned to her dwelling place and offered the
morning prayer. I asked her, "O you! I think we have come (to Mina) early in
the night." She replied, "O my son! Allah's Apostle gave permission to the
women to do so."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 740:
Narrated 'Aisha :
Sauda asked the permission of the Prophet to leave earlier at the night of
Jam', and she was a fat and very slow woman. The Prophet gave her
permission.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 741:
Narrated 'Aisha:
We got down at Al-Muzdalifa and Sauda asked the permission of the
Prophet to leave (early) before the rush of the people. She was a slow
woman and he gave her permission, so she departed (from Al-Muzdalifa)
before the rush of the people. We kept on staying at Al-Muzdalifa till dawn,
and set out with the Prophet but (I suffered so much that) I wished I had
taken the permission of Allah's Apostle as Sauda had done, and that would
have been dearer to me than any other happiness.
Volume 2, Book 26, Number 742:
Narrated Abdullah:
I never saw the Prophet offering any prayer not at its stated time except
two; he prayed the Maghrib and the 'Isha' together and he offered the
morning prayer before its usual time.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 743:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid
I went out with 'Abdullah , to Mecca and when we proceeded to am' he
offered the two prayers (the Maghrib and the 'Isha') together, making the
Adhan and Iqama separately for each prayer. He took his supper in between
the two prayers. He offered the Fajr prayer as soon as the day dawned.
Some people said, "The day had dawned (at the time of the prayer)," and
others said, "The day had not dawned." 'Abdullah then said, "Allah's Apostle
said, 'These two prayers have been shifted from their stated times at this
place only (at Al-Muzdalifa); first: The Maghrib and the 'Isha'. So the people
should not arrive at Al-Muzdalifa till the time of the 'Isha' prayer has become
due. The second prayer is the morning prayer which is offered at this hour.' "
Then 'Abdullah stayed there till it became a bit brighter. He then said, "If the
chief of the believers hastened onwards to Mina just now, then he had
indeed followed the Sunna." I do not know which proceeded the other, his
('Abdullah's) statement or the departure of 'Uthman . Abdullah was reciting
Talbiya till he threw pebbles at the Jamrat-al-'Aqaba on the Day of Nahr
(slaughtering) (that is the 10th of Dhul-Hijja).

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 744:
Narrated 'Amr bin Maimun:
I saw 'Umar, offering the Fajr (morning) prayer at Jam'; then he got up and
said, "The pagans did not use to depart (from Jam') till the sun had risen,
and they used to say, 'Let the sun shine on Thabir (a mountain).' But the
Prophet contradicted them and departed from Jam' before sunrise."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 745:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet made Al-Faql ride behind him, and Al-Fadl informed that he (the
Prophet ) kept on reciting Talbiya till he did the Rami of the Jamra. (Jamratal-Aqaba.)

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 746:
Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah:
Ibn Abbas said, "Usama bin Zaid rode behind the Prophet from 'Arafat to AlMuzdalifa; and then from Al-Muzdalifa to Mina, Al-Fadl rode behind him." He
added, "Both of them (Usama and Al-Fadl) said, 'The Prophet was
constantly reciting Talbiya till he did Rami of the Jamarat-al-'Aqaba."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 747:
Narrated Abu Jamra:
I asked Ibn Abbas about Hajj-at-Tamattu'. He ordered me to perform it. I
asked him about the Hadi (sacrifice). He said, "You have to slaughter a
camel, a cow or a sheep, or you may share the Hadi with the others." It
seemed that some people disliked it (Hajj-at-Tamattu). I slept and dreamt as
if a person was announcing: "Hajj Mabrur and accepted Mut'ah (Hajj-AtTamattu')" I went to Ibn Abbas and narrated it to him. He said, "Allah is
Greater. (That was) the tradition of Abu Al-Qasim (i.e. Prophet). Narrated
Shu'ba that the call in the dream was. "An accepted 'Umra and Hajj-Mabrur.
"
Volume 2, Book 26, Number 748:
Narrated Abu Huraira' :
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) saw a man driving his Badana (sacrificial camel). He
said, "Ride on it." The man said, "It is a Badana." The Prophet said, "Ride on
it." He (the man) said, "It is a Badana." The Prophet said, "Ride on it." And
on the second or the third time he (the Prophet ) added, "Woe to you."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 749:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet saw a man driving a Badana. He said, "Ride on it." The man
replied, "It is a Badana." The Prophet said (again), "Ride on it." He (the man)
said, "It is a Badana." The Prophet said thrice, "Ride on it."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 750:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
During the last Hajj (Hajj-al-Wada') of Allah's Apostle he performed 'Umra
and Hajj. He drove a Hadi along with him from Dhul-Hulaifa. Allah's Apostle
started by assuming Ihram for'Umra and Hajj. And the people, too,
performed the 'Umra and Hajj along with the Prophet. Some of them
brought the Hadi and drove it along with them, while the others did not. So,
when the Prophet arrived at Mecca. he said to the people, "Whoever among
you has driven the Hadi, should not finish his Ihram till he completes his Hajj.
And whoever among you has not (driven) the Hadi with him, should perform
Tawaf of the Ka'ba and the Tawaf between Safa and Marwa, then cut short
his hair and finish his Ihram, and should later assume Ihram for Hajj; but he
must offer a Hadi (sacrifice); and if anyone cannot afford a Hadi, he should
fast for three days during the Hajj and seven days when he returns home.
The Prophet performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba on his arrival (at Mecca); he
touched the (Black Stone) corner first of all and then did Ramal (fast walking
with moving of the shoulders) during the first three rounds round the Ka'ba,
and during the last four rounds he walked. After finishing Tawaf of the
Ka'ba, he offered a two Rakat prayer at Maqam Ibrahim, and after finishing
the prayer he went to Safa and Marwa and performed seven rounds of
Tawaf between them and did not do any deed forbidden because of Ihram,
till he finished all the ceremonies of his Hajj and sacrificed his Hadi on the
day of Nahr (10th day of Dhul-Hijja). He then hastened onwards (to Mecca)
and performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba and then everything that was forbidden
because of Ihram became permissible. Those who took and drove the Hadi
with them did the same as Allah's Apostle did.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 751:
Narrated Nafi':
'Abdullah (bin 'Abdullah) bin 'Umar said to his father, "Stay here, for I am
afraid that it (affliction between Ibn Zubair and Al-Hajjaj) might prevent you
from reaching the Ka'ba." Ibn 'Umar said, "(In this case) I would do the same
as Allah's Apostle did, and Allah has said, 'Verily, in Allah's Apostle, you have
a good example (to follow).' So, I make you, people, witness that I have
made 'Umra compulsory for me." So he assumed lhram for'Umra. Then he
went out and when he reached Al-Baida', he assumed Ihram for Hajj and
'Umra (together) and said, "The conditions (requisites) of Hajj and 'Umra are
the same." He, then brought a Hadi from Qudaid. Then he arrived (at Mecca)
and performed Tawaf (between Safa and Marwa) once for both Hajj and
'Umra and did not finish the lhram till he had finished both Hajj and 'Umra.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 752:
Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama and Marwan:
The Prophet set out from Medina with over one thousand of his companions
(at the time of the Treaty of Hudaibiya) and when they reached Dhul-Hulaifa,
the Prophet garlanded his Hadi and marked it and assumed Ihram for'Umra.
Volume 2, Book 26, Number 753:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I twisted with my own hands the garlands for the Budn of the Prophet who
garlanded and marked them, and then made them proceed to Mecca; Yet
no permissible thing was regarded as illegal for him then.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 754:
Narrated Hafsa:
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! What is wrong with the people, they have finished
their Ihram but you have not?" He said, "I matted my hair and I have
garlanded my Hadi, so I will not finish my Ihram till I finished my Hajj ."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 755:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle used to send the Hadi from Medina and I used to twist the
garlands for his Hadi and he did not keep away from any of these things
which a Muhrim keeps away from.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 756:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I twisted the garlands for the Hadis of the Prophet and then he marked and
garlanded them (or I garlanded them) and then made them proceed to the
Ka'ba but he remained in Medina and no permissible thing was regarded as
illegal for him then .

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 757:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Bakr bin 'Amr bin Hazm
that 'Amra bint 'Abdur-Rahman had told him, "Zaid bin Abu Sufyan wrote to
'Aisha that 'Abdullah bin Abbas had stated, 'Whoever sends his Hadi (to the
Ka'ba), all the things which are illegal for a (pilgrim) become illegal for that
person till he slaughters it (i.e. till the 10th of Dhul-Hijja).' " 'Amra added,
'Aisha said, 'It is not like what Ibn Abbas had said: I twisted the garlands of
the Hadis of Allah's Apostle with my own hands. Then Allah's Apostle put
them round their necks with his own hands, sending them with my father;
Yet nothing permitted by Allah was considered illegal for Allah's Apostle till
he slaughtered the Hadis.' "

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 758:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Once the Prophet sent sheep as Hadi.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 759:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I used to make the garlands for (the Hadis of) the Prophet and he would
garland the sheep (with them) and would stay with his family as a nonMuhrim.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 760:
Narrated Aisha:
I used to twist the garlands for the sheep of the Prophet and he would send
them (to the Ka'ba), and stay as a non-Muhrim.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 761:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I twisted (the garlands) for the Hadis of the Prophet before he assumed
Ihram.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 762:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I twisted the garlands of the Hadis from the wool which was with me.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 763:
Narrated 'Ikrima:
Abu Huraira said, "The Prophet saw a man driving a Badana (sacrificial
camel). The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said (to him), 'Ride on it.' He replied, 'It is a
Badana.' The Prophet again said, 'Ride on it!' Abu Huraira added, 'Then I saw
that man riding it, showing obedience to the Prophet (p.b.u.h), and a shoe
was (hanging) from its neck.' "

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 764:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
From the Prophet: (as above).

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 765:
Narrated 'Ali:
Allah's Apostle ordered me to give in charity the skin and the coverings of
the Budn which I had slaughtered.
Volume 2, Book 26, Number 766:
Narrated Nafi':
Ibn 'Umar intended to perform Hajj in the year of the Hajj of Al-Harawriya
during the rule of Ibn Az-Zubair. Some people said to him, "It is very likely
that there will be a fight among the people, and we are afraid that they
might prevent you (from performing Hajj)." He replied, "Verily, in Allah's
Apostle there is a good example for you (to follow). In this case I would do
the same as he had done. I make you witness that I have intended to
perform 'Umra." When he reached Al-Baida', he said, "The conditions for
both Hajj and 'Umra are the same. I make you witness that I have intended
to perform Hajj along with 'Umra." After that he took a garlanded Hadi (to
Mecca) which he bought (on the way). When he reached (Mecca), he
performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba and of Safa (and Marwa) and did not do more
than that. He did not make legal for himself the things which were illegal for
a Muhrim till it was the Day of Nahr (sacrifice), when he had his head shaved
and slaughtered (the sacrifice) and considered sufficient his first Tawaf
(between Safa and Marwa), as a (Sa'i) for his Hajj and 'Umra both. He then
said, "The Prophet used to do like that."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 767:
Narrated 'Amra bint 'AbdurRahman:
I heard 'Aisha saying, "Five days before the end of Dhul-Qa'ada we set out
from Medina in the company of Allah's Apostle with the intention of
performing Hajj only. When we approached Mecca, Allah's Apostle ordered
those who had no Hadi with them to finish their lhram after performing
Tawaf of the Ka'ba and (Sa'i) and between Safa and Marwa." 'Aisha added,
"On the day of Nahr (slaughtering of sacrifice) beef was brought to us. I
asked, 'What is this?' The reply was, 'Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) has
slaughtered (sacrifices) on behalf of his wives.' "

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 768:
Narrated Nafi':
'Abdullah (bin 'Umar), used to slaughter (his sacrifice) at the Manhar.
('Ubaidullah, a sub-narrator said, "The Manhar of Allah's Apostle.")

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 769:
Narrated Nafi':
Ibn 'Umar used to send his Hadi from Jam' (to Mina) in the last third of the
night with the pilgrims amongst whom there were free men and slaves, till it
was taken into the Manhar (slaughtering place) of the Prophet .

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 770:
Narrated Sahl bin Bakkar:
The narration of Anas abridged, saying, "The Prophet slaughtered seven
Budn (camels) while standing, with his own hands. On the day of 'Id-ul-Adha
he slaughtered (sacrificed) two horned rams, black and white in color.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 771:
Narrated Zaid bin Jubair:
I saw Ibn 'Umar passing by a man who had made his Badana sit to slaughter
it. Ibn 'Umar said, "Slaughter it while it is standing with one leg tied up as is
the tradition of Muhammad."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 772:
Narrated Anas :
The Prophet offered four Rakat of Zuhr prayer at Medina; and two Rakat of
'Asr prayer at Dhul-hulaifa and spent the night there and when (the day)
dawned, he mounted his Mount and started saying, "None has the right to
be worshipped but Allah, and Glorified be Allah." When he reached Al-Baida'
he recited Talbiya for both Hajj and 'Umra. And when he arrived at Mecca,
he ordered them (his companions) to finish their Ihram. The Prophet
slaughtered seven Budn (camel) with his own hands while the camels were
standing He also sacrificed two horned rams (black and white in color) at
Medina.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 773:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet (p.b.u.h) offered four Rakat of Zuhr prayer at Medina and two
Rakat of 'Asr prayer at Dhul-Hulaifa. Narrated Aiyub: "A man said: Anas said,
"Then he (the Prophet passed the night there till dawn and then he offered
the morning (Fajr) prayer, and mounted his Mount and when it arrived at AlBaida' he assumed Ihram for both 'Umra and Hajj."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 774:
Narrated 'Ali:
The Prophet sent me to supervise the (slaughtering of) Budn (Hadi camels)
and ordered me to distribute their meat, and then he ordered me to
distribute their covering sheets and skins. 'All added, "The Prophet ordered
me to supervise the slaughtering (of the Budn) and not to give anything (of
their bodies) to the butcher as wages for slaughtering."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 775:
Narrated 'Ali:
The Prophet ordered me to supervise the (slaughtering) of Budn (Hadi
camel) and to distribute their meat, skins and covering sheets in charity and
not to give anything (of their bodies) to the butcher as wages for
slaughtering.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 776:
Narrated 'Ali:
The Prophet offered one hundred Budn as Hadi and ordered me to
distribute their meat (in charity) and I did so. Then he ordered me to
distribute their covering sheets in charity and I did so. Then he ordered me
to distribute their skins in charity and I did so.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 777:
Narrated Ibn Juraij:
'Ata' said, "I heard Jabir bin 'Abdullah saying, 'We never ate the meat of the
Budn for more than three days of Mina. Later, the Prophet gave us
permission by saying: 'Eat and take (meat) with you. So we ate (some) and
took (some) with us.' " I asked 'Ata', "Did Jabir say (that they went on eating
the meat) till they reached Medina?" 'Ata' replied, "No."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 778:
Narrated 'Amra:
I heard 'Aisha saying, "We set out (from Medina) along with Allah's Apostle
five days before the end of Dhul-Qa'da with the intention of performing Hajj
only. When we approached Mecca, Allah's Apostle ordered those who had
no Hadi along with them to finish the lhram after performing Tawaf of the
Ka'ba, (Safa and Marwa). 'Aisha added, "Beef was brought to us on the Day
of Nahr and I said, 'What is this?' Somebody said, 'The Prophet has
slaughtered (cows) on behalf of his wives.' "
Volume 2, Book 26, Number 779:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet was asked about a person who had his head shaved before
slaughtering (his Hadi) (or other similar ceremonies of Hajj). He replied,
"There is no harm, there is no harm."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 780:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
A man said to the Prophet "I performed the Tawaf-al-Ifada before the Rami
(throwing pebbles at the Jamra)." The Prophet replied, "There is no harm."
The man said, "I had my head shaved before slaughtering." The Prophet
replied, "There is no harm." He said, "I have slaughtered the Hadi before the
Rami." The Prophet replied, "There is no harm."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 781:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet was asked by a man who said, "I have done the Rami in the
evening." The Prophet replied, "There is no harm in it." Another man asked,
"I had my head shaved before the slaughtering." The Prophet replied,
"There is no harm in it."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 782:
Narrated Abu Musa:
came upon Allah's Apostle when he was at Al-Bat-ha. He asked me, "Have
you intended to perform the Hajj?" I replied in the affirmative. He asked,
"For what have you assumed lhram?" I replied," I have assumed Ihram with
the same intention as that of the Prophet ." The Prophet said, "You have
done well! Go and perform Tawaf round the Ka'ba and between Safa and
Marwa." Then I went to one of the women of Bani Qais and she took out lice
from my head. Later, I assumed the Ihram for Hajj. So, I used to give this
verdict to the people till the caliphate of 'Umar. When I told him about it, he
said, "If we take (follow) the Holy Book, then it orders us to complete Hajj
and 'Umra (Hajj-at-Tamattu') and if we follow the tradition of Allah's Apostle
then Allah's Apostle did not finish his lhram till the Hadi had reached its
destination (had been slaughtered). (i.e. Hajj-al-Qiran). (See Hadith No. 630)

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 783:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Hafsa said, "O Allah's Apostle! What is wrong with the people; they finished
their Ihram after performing 'Umra, but you have not finished it after your
'Umra?" He replied, "I matted my hair and have garlanded my Hadi. So, I
cannot finish my Ihram till I slaughter (my Hadi). "

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 784:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) (got) his head shaved after performing his Hajj.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 785:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "O Allah! Be merciful to those who have their head
shaved." The people said, "O Allah's Apostle! And (invoke Allah for) those
who get their hair cut short." The Prophet said, "O Allah! Be merciful to
those who have their head shaved." The people said, "O Allah's Apostle! And
those who get their hair cut short." The Prophet said (the third time), "And
to those who get their hair cut short." Nafi' said that the Prophet had said
once or twice, "O Allah! Be merciful to those who get their head shaved,"
and on the fourth time he added, "And to those who have their hair cut
short."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 786:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "O Allah! Forgive those who get their heads shaved."
The people asked. "Also those who get their hair cut short?" The Prophet
said, "O Allah! Forgive those who have their heads shaved." The people said,
"Also those who get their hair cut short?" The Prophet (invoke Allah for
those who have their heads shaved and) at the third time said, "also
(forgive) those who get their hair cut short."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 787:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet and some of his companions got their heads shaved and some
others got their hair cut short. Narrated Muawiya: I cut short the hair of
Allah's Apostle with a long blade.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 788:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
When the Prophet came to Mecca, he ordered his Companions to perform
Tawaf round the Ka'ba and between Safa and Marwa, to finish their Ihram
and get their hair shaved off or cut short.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 789:
Narrated 'Aisha:
We performed Hajj with the Prophet and performed Tawaf-al-ifada on the
Day of Nahr (slaughtering). Safiya got her menses and the Prophets desired
from her what a husband desires from his wife. I said to him, "O Allah's
Apostle! She is having her menses." He said, "Is she going to detain us?" We
informed him that she had performed Tawaf-al-Ifada on the Day of Nahr. He
said, "(Then you can) depart."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 790:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet was asked about the slaughtering, shaving (of the head), and
the doing of Rami before or after the due times. He said, "There is no harm
in that."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 791:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet was asked (as regards the ceremonies of Hajj) at Mina on the
Day of Nahr and he replied that there was no harm. Then a man said to him,
"I got my head shaved before slaughtering." He replied, "Slaughter (now)
and there is no harm in it." (Another) man said, "I did the Rami (of the Jimar)
after midday." The Prophet replied, "There was no harm in it."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 792:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr :
Allah's Apostle stopped (for a while near the Jimar at Mina) during his last
Hajj and the people started asking him questions. A man said, "Ignorantly I
got my head shaved before slaughtering." The Prophet replied, "Slaughter
(now) and there is no harm in it." Another man said, "Unknowingly I
slaughtered the Hadi before doing the Rami." The Prophet said, "Do Rami
now and there is no harm in it." So, on that day, when the Prophet was
asked about anything (about the ceremonies of Hajj) done before or after
(its stated time) his reply was, "Do it (now) and there is no harm."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 793:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As:
I witnessed the Prophet when he was delivering the sermon on the Day of
Nahr. A man stood up and said, "I thought that such and such was to be
done before such and such. I got my hair shaved before slaughtering."
(Another said), "I slaughtered the Hadi before doing the Rami." So, the
people asked about many similar things. The Prophet said, "Do it (now) and
there is no harm in all these cases." Whenever the Prophet was asked about
anything on that day, he replied, "Do it (now) and there is no harm in it."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 794:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As:
Allah's Apostle stopped while on his she-camel (the subnarrator then
narrated the Hadith as above, i.e. 793).

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 795:
Narrated 'Ikrima:
Ibn Abbas said: "Allah's Apostle delivered a sermon on the Day of Nahr, and
said, 'O people! (Tell me) what is the day today?' The people replied, 'It is the
forbidden (sacred) day.' He asked again, 'What town is this?' They replied, 'It
is the forbidden (Sacred) town.' He asked, 'Which month is this?' They
replied, 'It is the forbidden (Sacred) month.' He said, 'No doubt! Your blood,
your properties, and your honor are sacred to one another like the sanctity
of this day of yours, in this (sacred) town (Mecca) of yours, in this month of
yours.' The Prophet repeated his statement again and again. After that he
raised his head and said, 'O Allah! Haven't conveyed (Your Message) to
them'. Haven't I conveyed Your Message to them?' " Ibn Abbas added, "By
Him in Whose Hand my soul is, the following was his will (Prophet's will) to
his followers:--It is incumbent upon those who are present to convey this
information to those who are absent Beware don't renegade (as)
disbelievers (turn into infidels) after me, Striking the necks (cutting the
throats) of one another.' "

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 796:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
I heard the Prophet delivering a sermon at 'Arafat.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 797:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
The Prophet delivered to us a sermon on the Day of Nahr. He said, "Do you
know what is the day today?" We said, "Allah and His Apostle know better."
He remained silent till we thought that he might give that day another
name. He said, "Isn't it the Day of Nahr?" We said, "It is." He further asked,
"Which month is this?" We said, "Allah and His Apostle know better." He
remained silent till we thought that he might give it another name. He then
said, "Isn't it the month of Dhul-Hijja?" We replied: "Yes! It is." He further
asked, "What town is this?" We replied, "Allah and His Apostle know it
better." He remained silent till we thought that he might give it another
name. He then said, "Isn't it the forbidden (Sacred) town (of Mecca)?" We
said, "Yes. It is." He said, "No doubt, your blood and your properties are
sacred to one another like the sanctity of this day of yours, in this month of
yours, in this town of yours, till the day you meet your Lord. No doubt!
Haven't I conveyed Allah's message to you? They said, "Yes." He said, "O
Allah! Be witness. So it is incumbent upon those who are present to convey
it (this information) to those who are absent because the informed one
might comprehend it (what I have said) better than the present audience,
who will convey it to him. Beware! Do not renegade (as) disbelievers after
me by striking the necks (cutting the throats) of one another."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 798:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
At Mina, the Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Do you know what is the day today?"
The people replied, "Allah and His Apostle know it better." He said, "It is the
forbidden (sacred) day. And do you know what town is this?" They replied,
"Allah and His Apostle know it better." He said, "This is the forbidden
(Sacred) town (Mecca). And do you know which month is this?" The people
replied, "Allah and His Apostle know it better." He said, "This is the
forbidden (sacred) month." The Prophet added, "No doubt, Allah made your
blood, your properties, and your honor sacred to one another like the
sanctity of this day of yours in this month of yours in this town of yours."
Narrated Ibn 'Umar: On the Day of Nahr (10th of Dhul-Hijja), the Prophet
stood in between the Jamrat during his Hajj which he performed (as in the
previous Hadith) and said, "This is the greatest Day (i.e. 10th of Dhul-Hijjah)."
The Prophet started saying repeatedly, "O Allah! Be Witness (I have
conveyed Your Message)." He then bade the people farewell. The people
said, "This is Hajjat-al-Wada)."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 799:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet permitted (them).

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 800:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar
That the Prophet allowed (as above).
Volume 2, Book 26, Number 801:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Al-Abbas asked the permission from the Prophet to stay at Mecca during the
nights of Mina in order to provide water to the people, so the Prophet
allowed him.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 802:
Narrated Wabra:
I asked Ibn 'Umar, "When should I do the Rami of the Jimar?" He replied,
"When your leader does that." I asked him again the same question. He
replied, "We used to wait till the sun declined and then we would do the
Rami (i.e. on the 11th and 12th of Dhul-Hijja)."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 803:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid:
'Abdullah, did the Rami from the middle of the valley. So, I said, "O, Abu
'Abdur-Rahman! Some people do the Rami (of the Jamra) from above it (i.e.
from the top of the valley)." He said, "By Him except whom none has the
right to be worshipped, this is the place from where the one on whom Suratal-Baqara was revealed (i.e. Allah's Apostle) did the Rami."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 804:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid:
When 'Abdullah, reached the big Jamra (i.e. Jamrat-ul-Aqaba) he kept the
Ka'ba on the left side and Mina on his right side and threw seven pebbles (at
the Jamra) and said, "The one on whom Surat-al-Baqara was revealed (i.e.
the Prophet) had done the Rami similarly."
Volume 2, Book 26, Number 805:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid:
I performed Hajj with Ibn Masud , and saw him doing Rami of the big Jamra
(Jamrat-ul-Aqaba) with seven small pebbles, keeping the Ka'ba on his left
side and Mina on his right. He then said, "This is the place where the one on
whom Surat-al-Baqara was revealed (i.e. Allah's Apostle ) stood."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 806:
Narrated Al-Amash:
I heard Al-Hajjaj saying on the pulpit, "The Sura in which Al-Baqara (the cow)
is mentioned and the Sura in which the family of 'Imran is mentioned and
the Sura in which the women (An-Nisa) is mentioned." I mentioned this to
Ibrahim, and he said, 'Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid told me, 'I was with Ibn
Masud, when he did the Rami of the Jamrat-ul-Aqaba. He went down the
middle of the valley, and when he came near the tree (which was near the
Jamra) he stood opposite to it and threw seven small pebbles and said:
'Allahu-Akbar' on throwing every pebble.' Then he said, 'By Him, except
Whom none has the right to be worshipped, here (at this place) stood the
one on whom Surat-al-Baqra was revealed (i.e. Allah's Apostle).' "

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 807:
Narrated Salim:
Ibn 'Umar used to do Rami of the Jamrat-ud-Dunya (the Jamra near to the
Khaif mosque) with seven small stones and used to recite Takbir on
throwing every pebble. He then would go ahead till he reached the level
ground where he would stand facing the Qibla for a long time to invoke
(Allah) while raising his hands (while invoking). Then he would do Rami of
the Jamrat-ul-Wusta (middle Jamra) and then he would go to the left
towards the middle ground, where he would stand facing the Qibla. He
would remain standing there for a long period to invoke (Allah) while raising
his hands, and would stand there for a long period. Then he would do Rami
of the Jamrat-ul-Aqaba from the middle of the valley, but he would not stay
by it, and then he would leave and say, "I saw the Prophet doing like this."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 808:
Narrated Salim bin Abdullah:
'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to do Rami of the Jamrat-ud-Dunya with seven
small pebbles and used to recite Takbir on throwing each stone. He, then,
would proceed further till he reached the level ground, where he would stay
for a long time, facing the Qibla to invoke (Allah) while raising his hands.
Then he would do Rami of the Jamrat-ul-Wusta similarly and would go to the
left towards the level ground, where he would stand for a long time facing
the Qibla to invoke (Allah) while raising his hands. Then he would do Rami of
the Jamrat-ul-'Aqaba from the middle of the valley, but he would not stay by
it. Ibn 'Umar used to say, "I saw Allah's Apostle doing like that."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 809:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Al-Qasim:
I heard my father who was the best man of his age, saying, "I heard 'Aisha
saying, 'I perfumed Allah's Apostle with my own hands before finishing his
Ihram while yet he has not performed Tawaf-al-Ifada.' She spread her hands
(while saying so.)"

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 810:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The people were ordered to perform the Tawaf of the Ka'ba (Tawaf-alWada') as the lastly thing, before leaving (Mecca), except the menstruating
women who were excused.
Volume 2, Book 26, Number 811:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet offered the Zuhr, 'Asr, Maghrib and the 'Isha' prayers and slept
for a while at a place called Al-Mahassab and then rode to the Ka'ba and
performed Tawaf round it .

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 812:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Safiya bint Huyay, the wife of the Prophet got her menses, and Allah's
Apostle was informed of that. He said, "Would she delay us?" The people
said, "She has already performed Tawaf-al-Ifada." He said, "Therefore she
will not (delay us)."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 813:
Narrated 'Ikrima:
The people of Medina asked Ibn Abbas about a woman who got her menses
after performing Tawaf-al-Ifada. He said, "She could depart (from Mecca)."
They said, "We will not act on your verdict and ignore the verdict of Zaid."
Ibn Abbas said, "When you reach Medina, inquire about it." So, when they
reached Medina they asked (about that). One of those whom they asked
was Um Sulaim. She told them the narration of Safiya (812).

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 814:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
A menstruating woman was allowed to leave Mecca if she had done Tawafal-Ifada. Tawus (a sub-narrator) said from his father, "I heard Ibn 'Umar
saying that she would not depart. Then later I heard him saying that the
Prophet had allowed them (menstruating women) to depart."
Volume 2, Book 26, Number 815:
Narrated 'Aisha:
We set out with the Prophet with the intention of performing Hajj only. The
Prophet reached Mecca and performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba and between
Safa and Marwa and did not finish the Ihram, because he had the Hadi with
him. His companions and his wives performed Tawaf (of the Ka'ba and
between Safa and Marwa), and those who had no Hadi with them finished
their Ihram. I got the menses and performed all the ceremonies of Hajj. So,
when the Night of Hasba (night of departure) came, I said, "O Allah's
Apostle! All your companions are returning with Hajj and 'Umra except me."
He asked me, "Didn't you perform Tawaf of the Ka'ba (Umra) when you
reached Mecca?" I said, "No." He said, "Go to Tan'im with your brother
'Abdur-Rahman, and assume Ihram for 'Umra and I will wait for you at such
and such a place." So I went with 'Abdur-Rahman to Tan'im and assumed
Ihram for 'Umra. Then Safiya bint Huyay got menses. The Prophet said, "
'Aqra Halqa! You will detain us! Didn't you perform Tawaf-al-Ifada on the Day
of Nahr (slaughtering)?" She said, "Yes, I did." He said, "Then there is no
harm, depart." So I met the Prophet when he was ascending the heights
towards Mecca and I was descending, or vice-versa.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 816:
Narrated 'Abdul-Aziz bin Rufai:
I asked Anas bin Malik, "Tell me something you have observed about the
Prophet concerning where he offered the Zuhr prayer on the Day of Tarwiya
(8th Dhul-Hijja)." Anas replied, "He offered it at Mina." I said, "Where did he
offer the Asr prayer on the Day of Nafr (day of departure from Mina)?" He
replied, "At Al-Abtah," and added, "You should do as your leaders do."

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 817:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet offered the Zuhr, 'Asr, Maghrib and 'Isha' prayers and slept for
a while at a place called Al-Mahassab and then he rode towards the Ka'ba
and performed Tawaf (al-Wada').

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 818:
Narrated 'Aisha:
It (i.e. Al-Abtah) was a place where the Prophet used to camp so that it
might be easier for him to depart.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 819:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Staying at Al-Mahassab is not one of the ceremonies (of Hajj), but AlMahassab is a place where Allah's Apostle camped (during his Hajjat-ulwida).

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 820:
Narrated Nafi:
Ibn 'Umar used to spend the night at Dhi-Tuwa in between the two Thaniyas
and then he would enter Mecca through the Thaniya which is at the higher
region of Mecca, and whenever he came to Mecca for Hajj or 'Umra, he
never made his she camel kneel down except near the gate of the Masjid
(Sacred Mosque) and then he would enter (it) and go to the Black (stone)
Corner and start from there circumambulating the Ka'ba seven times:
hastening in the first three rounds (Ramal) and walking in the last four. On
finishing, he would offer two Rakat prayer and set out to perform Tawaf
between Safa and Marwa before returning to his dwelling place. On
returning (to Medina) from Hajj or 'Umra, he used to make his camel kneel
down at Al-Batha which is at Dhu-l-Hulaifa, the place where the Prophet
used to make his camel kneel down.

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 821:
Narrated Khalid bin Al-Harith:
'Ubaidullah was asked about Al Mahassab. 'Ubaidullah narrated: Nafi' said,
'Allah's Apostles, 'Umar and Ibn 'Umar camped there." Nafi' added, "Ibn
'Umar used to offer the Zuhr and 'Asr prayers at it (i.e. Al-Mahassab)." I
think he mentioned the Maghrib prayer also. I said, "I don't doubt about
'Isha' (i.e. he used to offer it there also), and he used to sleep there for a
while. He used to say, 'The Prophet used to do the same.' "

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 822:
Narrated Ibn ' Abbas :
Dhul-Majaz and 'Ukaz were the markets of the people during the pre-lslamic
period of ignorance. When the people embraced Islam, they disliked to do
bargaining there till the following Holy Verses were revealed:-- There is no
harm for you If you seek of the bounty Of your Lord (during Hajj by trading,
etc.) (2.198)

Volume 2, Book 26, Number 823:
Narrated ' Aisha:
Safiya got her menses on the night of Nafr (departure from Hajj), and she
said, "I see that I will detain you." The Prophet said, "Aqra Halqa! Did she
perform the Tawaf on the Day of Nahr (slaughtering)?" Somebody replied in
the affirmative. He said, "Then depart." (Different narrators mentioned that)
'Aisha said, "We set out with Allah's Apostle (from Medina) with the
intention of performing Hajj only. When we reached Mecca, he ordered us
to finish the Ihram. When it was the night of Nafr (departure), Safiya bint
Huyay got her menses. The Prophet said, "Halqa Aqra! I think that she will
detain you," and added, "Did you perform the Tawaf (Al-Ifada) on the Day of
Nahr (slaughtering)?" She replied, "Yes." He said, "Then depart." I said, "O
Allah's Apostle! I have not (done the Umra)." He replied, "Perform 'Umra
from Tan'im." My brother went with me and we came across the Prophet in
the last part of the night. He said, "Wait at such and such a place."
VOLUME 3
BOOK 27. MINOR PILGRAMMAGE (UMRA) (1-32)
Volume 3, Book 27, Number 1:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "(The performance of) 'Umra is an expiation for the sins
committed (between it and the previous one). And the reward of Hajj
Mabrur (the one accepted by Allah) is nothing except Paradise."

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 2:
Narrated Ibn Juraij:
Ikrima bin Khalid asked Ibn 'Umar about performing 'Umra before Hajj. Ibn
'Umar replied, "There is no harm in it." 'Ikrima said, "Ibn 'Umar also said,
'The Prophet had performed 'Umra before performing Hajj.'"

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 3:
Narrated 'Ikrima bin Khalid:
"I asked Ibn 'Umar the same (as above)."

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 4:
Narrated Mujahid:
Ursa bin AzZubair and I entered the Mosque (of the Prophet) and saw
'Abdullah bin Umar sitting near the dwelling place of Aisha and some people
were offering the Duha prayer. We asked him about their prayer and he
replied that it was a heresy. He (Ursa) then asked him how many times the
Prophet had performed 'Umra. He replied, 'Four times; one of them was in
the month of Rajab." We disliked to contradict him. Then we heard 'Aisha,
the Mother of faithful believers cleaning her teeth with Siwak in the
dwelling place. 'Ursa said, "O Mother! O Mother of the believers! Don't you
hear what Abu 'Abdur Rahman is saying?" She said, "What does he say?"
'Ursa said, "He says that Allah's Apostle performed four 'Umra and one of
them was in the month of Rajab." 'Aisha said, "May Allah be merciful to Abu
'Abdur Rahman! The Prophet did not perform any 'Umra except that he was
with him, and he never performed any 'Umra in Rajab."

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 5:
Narrated 'Ursa bin Az-Zubair:
I asked 'Aisha (whether the Prophet had performed 'Umra in Rajab). She
replied, "Allah's Apostle never performed any 'Umra in Rajab."

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 6:
Narrated Qatada:
I asked Anas how many times the Prophet had performed 'Umra. He replied,
"Four times. 1. 'Umra of Hudaibiya in Dhi-l-Qa'da when the pagans hindered
him; 2. 'Umra in the following year in Dhi-l-Qa'da after the peace treaty with
them (the pagans); 3. 'Umra from Al-Jr'rana where he distributed the war
booty." I think he meant the booty (of the battle) of Hunain. I asked, "How
many times did he perform Hajj?" He (Anas) replied, "Once. "

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 7:
Narrated Qatada:
I asked Anas (about the Prophet's 'Umra) and he replied, "The Prophet
performed 'Umra when the pagans made him return, and Umra of alHudaibiya (the next year), and another 'Umra in Dhi-l-Qa'da, and another
'Umra in combination with his Hajj."
Volume 3, Book 27, Number 8:
Narrated Hammam:
The Prophet performed four 'Umra (three) in Dhi-l-Qa'da except the (one)
'Umra which he performed with his Hajj: His 'Umra from Al-hudaibiya, and
the one of the following year, and the one from Al-Jr'rana where he
distributed the booty (of the battle) of Hunain, and another 'Umra with his
Hajj.

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 9:
Narrated Abu Ishaq:
I asked Masruq, 'Ata' and Mujahid (about the 'Umra of Allah's Apostle). They
said, "Allah's Apostle had performed 'Umra in Dhi-l-Qa'da before he
performed Hajj." I heard Al-Bara' bin 'Azib saying, "Allah's Apostle had
performed 'Umra in Dhi-l-Qa'da twice before he performed Hajj."

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 10:
Narrated Ata:
I heard Ibn 'Abbas saying, "Allah's Apostle asked an Ansari woman (Ibn
'Abbas named her but 'Ata' forgot her name), 'What prevented you from
performing Hajj with us?' She replied, 'We have a camel and the father of soand-so and his son (i.e. her husband and her son) rode it and left one camel
for us to use for irrigation.' He said (to her), 'Perform 'Umra when Ramadan
comes, for 'Umra in Ramadan is equal to Hajj (in reward),' or said something
similar."

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 11:
Narrated Aisha:
We set out along with Allah's Apostle shortly before the appearance of the
new moon (crescent) of the month of Dhi-l-Hijja and he said to us, "Whoever
wants to assume Ihram for Hajj may do so; and whoever wants to assume
Ihram for 'Umra may do so. Hadn't I brought the Hadi (animal for sacrificing)
(with me), I would have assumed Ihram for 'Umra." ('Aisha added,): So
some of us assumed Ihram for 'Umra while the others for Hajj. I was
amongst those who assumed Ihram for 'Umra. The day of 'Arafat
approached and I was still menstruating. I complained to the Prophet (about
that) and he said, "Abandon your 'Umra, undo and comb your hair, and
assume Ihram for Hajj;." When it was the night of Hasba, he sent 'Abdur
Rahman with me to At-Tan'im and I assumed Ihram for 'Umra (and
performed it) in lieu of my missed 'Umra.

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 12:
Narrated 'Amr bin Aus:
Abdul Rahman bin Abu Bakr told me that the Prophet had ordered him to let
'Aisha ride behind him and to make he perform 'Umra from At-Tan'im.

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 13:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet and his companions assumed Ihram for Hajj and none except
the Prophet and Talha had the Hadi with them. 'Ali had come from Yemen
and he had the Hadi with him. He ('Ali) said, "I have assumed Ihram with an
intention like that of Allah's Apostle has assumed it." The Prophet ordered
his companions to intend the Ihram with which they had come for 'Umra, to
perform the Tawaf of the Ka'ba (and between Safa and Marwa), to get their
hair cut short and then to finish their Ihram with the exception of those who
had the Hadi with them. They asked, "Shall we go to Mina and the private
organs of some of us are dribbling (if we finish Ihram and have sexual
relations with our wives)?" The Prophet heard that and said, "Had I known
what I know now, I would not have brought the Hadi. If I did not have the
Hadi with me I would have finished my Ihram." 'Aisha got her menses and
performed all the ceremonies (of Hajj) except the Tawaf . So when she
became clean from her menses, and she had performed the Tawaf of the
Ka'ba, she said, "O Allah's Apostle! You (people) are returning with both Hajj
and 'Umra and I am returning only with Hajj!" So, he ordered 'Abdur Rahman
bin Abu Bakr to go with her to At-Tan'im. Thus she performed 'Umra after
the Hajj in the month of Dhi-l-Hijja. Suraqa bin Malik bin Ju'sham met the
Prophet at Al-'Aqaba (Jamrat-ul 'Aqaba) while the latter was stoning it and
said, "O Allah's Apostle! Is this permissible only for you?" The Prophet
replied, "No, it is for ever (i.e. it is permissible for all Muslims to perform
'Umra before Hajj."

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 14:
Narrated 'Aisha:
We set out with Allah's Apostle shortly before the appearance of the new
moon of Dhi-l-Hiija and he said, "Whoever wants to assume Ihram for 'Umra
may do so, and whoever wants to assume Ihram for Hajj may do so. Had not
I brought the Hadi with me, I would have assumed Ihram for 'Umra." Some
of the people assumed Ihram for 'Umra while others for Hajj. I was amongst
those who had assumed Ihram for 'Umra. I got my menses before entering
Mecca, and was menstruating till the day of 'Arafat. I complained to Allah's
Apostle about it, he said, "Abandon your 'Umra, undo and comb your hair,
and assume Ihram for Hajj." So, I did that accordingly. When it was the night
of Hasba (day of departure from Mina), the Prophet sent 'Abdur Rahman
with me to At-Tanim.
The sub-narrator adds: He ('AbdurRahman) let her ride behind him. And she
assumed Ihram for 'Umra in lieu of the abandoned one. Aisha completed her
Hajj and 'Umra, and no Hadi, Sadaqa (charity), or fasting was obligatory for
her.

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 15:
Narrated Al-Aswad:
That 'Aisha said, "O Allah's Apostle! The people are returning after
performing the two Nusuks (i.e. Hajj and 'Umra) but I am returning with one
only?" He said, "Wait till you become clean from your menses and then go to
At-Tan'im, assume Ihram (and after performing 'Umra) join us at such-andsuch a place. But it (i.e. the reward if 'Umra) is according to your expenses
or the hardship (which you will undergo while performing it)."

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 16:
Narrated 'Aisha:
We set out assuming the Ihram for Hajj in the months of Hajj towards the
sacred precincts of Hajj. We dismounted at Sarif and the Prophet said to his
companions, "Whoever has not got the Hadi with him and likes to make it as
'Umra, he should do it, but he who has got the Hadi with him should not do
it." The Prophet and some of his wealthy companions had the Hadi with
them, so they did not finish Ihram after performing the 'Umra. The Prophet
came to me while I was weeping. He asked me the reason for it. I replied, "I
have heard of what you have said to your companions and I cannot do the
'Umra." He asked me, "What is the matter with you?" I replied, "I am not
praying." He said, "There is no harm in it as you are one of the daughters of
Adam and the same is written for you as for others. So, you should perform
Hajj and I hope that Allah will enable you to perform the 'Umra as well." So, I
carried on till we departed from Mina and halted at Al-Mahassab. The
Prophet called 'Abdur-Rahman and said, "Go out of the sanctuary with your
sister and let her assume Ihram for 'Umra, and after both of you have
finished the Tawaf I will be waiting for you at this place." We came back at
mid-night and the Prophet asked us, "Have you finished?" I replied in the
affirmative. He announced the departure and the people set out for the
journey and some of them had performed the Tawaf of the Ka'ba before the
morning prayer, and after that the Prophet set out for Medina.

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 17:
Narrated Safwan bin Ya'la bin Umaiya from his father who said:
"A man came to the Prophet while he was at Ji'rana. The man was wearing a
cloak which had traces of Khaluq or Sufra (a kind of perfume). The man
asked (the Prophet ), 'What do you order me to perform in my 'Umra?' So,
Allah inspired the Prophet divinely and he was screened by a place of cloth. I
wished to see the Prophet being divinely inspired. 'Umar said to me, 'Come!
Will you be pleased to look at the Prophet while Allah is inspiring him?' I
replied in the affirmative. 'Umar lifted one corner of the cloth and I looked
at the Prophet who was snoring. (The sub-narrator thought that he said: The
snoring was like that of a camel). When that state was over, the Prophet
asked, "Where is the questioner who asked about 'Umra? Put off your cloak
and wash away the traces of Khaluq from your body and clean the Sufra
(yellow color) and perform in your Umra what you perform in your Hajj (i.e.
the Tawaf round the Ka'ba and the Sa'i between Safa and Marwa). "

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 18:
Narrated Hisham Ibn 'Urwa from his father who said:
While I was a youngster, I asked 'Aisha the wife of the Prophet. "What about
the meaning of the Statement of Allah;
"Verily! (the mountains) As-Safa and Al Marwa, are among the symbols of
Allah. So, it is not harmful if those who perform Hajj or 'Umra of the House
(Ka'ba at Mecca) to perform the going (Tawaf) between them? (2.158) I
understand (from that) that there is no harm if somebody does not perform
the Tawaf between them." 'Aisha replied, "No, for if it were as you are
saying, then the recitation would have been like this: 'It is not harmful not to
perform Tawaf between them.' This verse was revealed in connection with
the Ansar who used to assume the Ihram for the idol Manat which was put
beside a place called Qudaid and those people thought it not right to
perform the Tawaf of As-Safa and Al-Marwa. When Islam came, they asked
Allah's Apostle about that, and Allah revealed:-"Verily! (the mountains) As-Safa and Al-Marwa Are among the symbols of
Allah. So, it is not harmful of those who perform Hajj or 'Umra of the House
(Ka'ba at Mecca) to perform the going (Tawaf) between them." (2.158)
Sufyan and Abu Muawiya added from Hisham (from 'Aisha): "The Hajj or
'Umra of the person who does not perform the going (Tawaf) between AsSafa and Al-Marwa is incomplete in Allah's sight.

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 19:
Narrated Isma'il:
Abdullah bin Abu Aufa said: "Allah's Apostle performed 'Umra and we too
performed 'Umra along with him. When he entered Mecca he performed
the Tawaf (of Ka'ba) and we too performed it along with him, and then he
came to the As-Safa and Al-Marwa (i.e. performed the Sai) and we also came
to them along with him. We were shielding him from the people of Mecca
lest they may hit him with an arrow." A friend of his asked him (i.e. 'Abdullah
bin Aufa), "Did the Prophet enter the Ka'ba (during that 'Umra)?" He replied
in the negative. Then he said, "What did he (the Prophet ) say about
Khadija?" He (Abdullah bin Aufa) said, "(He said) 'Give Khadija the good
tidings that she will have a palace made of Qasab in Paradise and there will
be neither noise nor any trouble in it."

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 20:
Narrated 'Amr bin Dinar:
We asked Ibn 'Umar whether a man who had performed the Tawaf of the
Ka'ba but had not performed the Tawaf between As-Safa and Al-Marwa yet,
was permitted to have sexual relation with his wife. He replied, "The
Prophet arrived (at Mecca) and circumambulated the Ka'ba seven times and
then offered a two Rak'at prayer behind Maqam-lbrahim and then
performed the going (Tawaf) between As-Safa and Al-Marwa (seven times)
(and verily, in Allah's Apostle you have a good example." And we asked Jabir
bin 'Abdullah (the same question) and he replied, "He should not go near
her till he has finished the going (Tawaf) between As-Safa and Al-Marwa."
Volume 3, Book 27, Number 21:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari:
I came to the Prophet at Al-Batha' while his camel was kneeling down and
he asked me, "Have you intended to perform the Hajj?" I replied in the
affirmative. He asked me, 'With what intention have you assumed Ihram?" I
replied, "I have assumed Ihram with the same intention as that of the
Prophet. He said, "You have done well. Perform the Tawaf of the Ka'ba and
(the Sai) between As-safa and Al-Marwa and then finish the Ihram." So, I
performed the Tawaf around the Ka'ba and the Sai) between As-Safa and AlMarwa and then went to a woman of the tribe of Qais who cleaned my head
from lice. Later I assumed the Ihram for Hajj. I used to give the verdict of
doing the same till the caliphate of 'Umar who said, "If you follow the Holy
Book then it orders you to remain in the state of Ihram till you finish from
Hajj, if you follow the Prophet then he did not finish his Ihram till the Hadi
(sacrifice) had reached its place of slaughtering (Hajj-al-Qiran)."

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 22:
Narrated Al-Aswad:
Abdullah the slave of Asma bint Abu Bakr, told me that he used to hear
Asma', whenever she passed by Al-Hajun, saying, "May Allah bless His
Apostle Muhammad. Once we dismounted here with him, and at that time
we were traveling with light luggage; we had a few riding animals and a little
food ration. I, my sister, 'Aisha, Az-Zubair and such and such persons
performed 'Umra, and when we had passed our hands over the Ka'ba (i.e.
performed Tawaf round the Ka'ba and between As-Safa and Al-Marwa) we
finished our lhram. Later on we assumed Ihram for Hajj the same evening."

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 23:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Whenever Allah's Apostle returned from a Ghazwa, Hajj or 'Umra, he used to
say Takbir thrice at every elevation of the ground and then would say,
"None has the right to be worshipped but Allah; He is One and has no
partner. All the kingdoms is for Him, and all the praises are for Him, and He is
Omnipotent. We are returning with repentance, worshipping, prostrating,
and praising our Lord. He has kept up His promise and made His slave
victorious, and He Alone defeated all the clans of (non-believers)."

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 24:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
When the Prophet arrived at Mecca, some boys of the tribe of Bani 'Abdul
Muttalib went to receive him, and the Prophet made one of them ride in
front of him and the other behind him.

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 25:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
Whenever Allah's Apostle left for Mecca, he used to pray in the mosque of
Ash-Shajra, and when he returned (to Medina), he used to pray in the middle
of the valley of Dhul-Hulaifa and used to pass the night there till morning.

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 26:
Narrated Anas: The Prophet never returned to his family from a journey at
night. He

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 27:
Narrated Jabir: The Prophet forbade going to one's family at night (on
arrival from a
Volume 3, Book 27, Number 28:
Narrated Humaid:
Anas said, "Whenever Allah's Apostle returned from a journey, he, on seeing
the high places of Medina, would make his she-camel proceed faster; and if
it were another animal, even then he used to make it proceed faster."
Narrated Humaid that the Prophet used to make it proceed faster out of his
love for Medina.

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 29:
Narrated Anas:
As above, but mentioned "the walls of Medina" instead of "the high places
of Medina. Al-Harith bin Umar agrees with Anas.

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 30:
Narrated Abu Ishaq:
I heard Al-Bara' saying, "The above Verse was revealed regarding us, for the
Ansar on returning from Hajj never entered their houses through the proper
doors but from behind. One of the Ansar came and entered through the
door and he was taunted for it. Therefore, the following was revealed: -"It is not righteousness That you enter the houses from the back, But the
righteous man is He who fears Allah, Obeys His order and keeps away from
What He has forbidden So, enter houses through the proper doors." (2.189)

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 31:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Traveling is a kind of torture as it prevents one from
eating, drinking and sleeping properly. So, when one's needs are fulfilled,
one should return quickly to one's family."

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 32:
Narrated Zaid bin Aslam from his father:
I was with Ibn 'Umar on the way to Mecca, and he got the news that Safiya
bint Abu Ubaid was seriously ill. So, he hastened his pace, and when the
twilight disappeared, he dismounted and offered the Maghrib and 'Isha'
prayers together. Then he said, "I saw that whenever the Prophet had to
hasten when traveling, he would delay the Maghrib prayer and join them
together (i.e. offer the Maghrib and the Isha prayers together)."
BOOK 28. PILGRIMS PREVENTED FROM COMPLETING THE PILGRIMAGE (33-46)
Volume 3, Book 28, Number 33:
Narrated Nafi:
When Abdullah bin Umar set out for Mecca intending to perform Umra, at
the time of afflictions, he said, "If I should be prevented from reaching the
Kaba, then I would do the same as Allah's Apostle did, so I assume the lhram
for Umra as Allah's Apostle assumed the Ihram for Umra in the year of
Hudaibiya."

Volume 3, Book 28, Number 34:
Narrated Nafi:
That Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah and Salim bin 'Abdullah informed him that
they told Ibn 'Umar when Ibn Az-Zubair was attacked by the army, saying
"There is no harm for you if you did not perform Hajj this year. We are afraid
that you may be prevented from reaching the Kaba." Ibn 'Umar said "We set
out with Allah's Apostle and the non-believers of Quraish prevented us from
reaching the Ka'ba, and so the Prophet slaughtered his Hadi and got his
head shaved." Ibn 'Umar added, "I make you witnesses that I have made
'Umra obligatory for me. And, Allah willing, I will go and then if the way to
Ka'ba is clear, I will perform the Tawaf, but if I am prevented from going to
the Ka'ba then I will do the same as the Prophet did while I was in his
company." Ibn 'Umar then assumed Ihram for Umra from Dhul-Hulaifa and
proceeded for a while and said, "The conditions of 'Umra and Hajj are similar
and I make you witnesses that I have made 'Umra and Hajj obligatory for
myself." So, he did not finish the Ihram till the day of Nahr (slaughtering)
came, and he slaughtered his Hadi. He used to say, "I will not finish the
Ihram till I perform the Tawaf, one Tawaf on the day of entering Mecca (i.e.
of Safa and Marwa for both 'Umra and Hajj)."
Volume 3, Book 28, Number 35:
Narrated Nafi: Some of the sons of 'Abdullah told him (i.e. 'Abdullah) if he
had sta

Volume 3, Book 28, Number 36:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle was prevented from performing ('Umra) Therefore, he
shaved his head and had sexual relations with his wives and slaughtered his
Hadi and performed Umra in the following year.

Volume 3, Book 28, Number 37:
Narrated Salim:
(Abdullah) bin 'Umar used to say, "Is not (the following of) the tradition of
Allah's Apostle sufficient for you? If anyone of you is prevented from
performing Hajj, he should perform the Tawaf of the Ka'ba and between AsSafa and Al-Marwa and then finish the Ihram and everything will become
legal for him which was illegal for him (during the state of Ihram) and he can
perform Hajj in a following year and he should slaughter a Hadi or fast in
case he cannot afford the Hadi."

Volume 3, Book 28, Number 38:
Narrated Al-Miswar:
Allah's Apostle slaughtered (the Hadi) before he had his head shaved and
then he ordered his Companions to do the same.

Volume 3, Book 28, Number 39:
Narrated Nafi:
That Abdullah and Salim said to 'Abdullah bin 'Umar, "(You should not go for
Hajj this year)." 'Abdullah bin 'Umar replied, "We set out with the Prophet
(to Mecca for performing 'Umra) and e infidels of Quraish prevented us
from reaching the Ka'ba. Allah's Apostle slaughtered his Budn (camels for
sacrifice) and got his head shaved."

Volume 3, Book 28, Number 40:
Narrated Nafi:
When Abdullah bin 'Umar set out for Mecca with the intentions performing
'Umra in the period of afflictions, he said, "If I should be prevented from
reaching the Ka'ba, then I would do the same as we did while in the
company of Allah's Apostle ." So, he assumed the Ihram for 'Umra since the
Prophet had assumed the Ihram for 'Umra in the year of Al-Hudaibiya. Then
'Abdullah bin 'Umar thought about it and said, "The conditions for both Hajj
and 'Umra are similar." He then turned towards his companions and said,
"The conditions of both Hajj and 'Umra are similar and I make you witnesses
that I have made the performance of Hajj obligatory for myself along with
'Umra." He then performed one Tawaf (between As-Safa and Al-Marwa) for
both of them (i.e. Hajj and ('Umra) and considered that to be sufficient for
him and offered a Hadi.

Volume 3, Book 28, Number 41:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Layla:
Ka'b bin 'Ujra said that Allah's Apostle said to him (Ka'b), "Perhaps your lice
have troubled you?" Ka'b replied, "Yes! O Allah's Apostle." Allah's Apostle
said, "Have your head shaved and then either fast three days or feed six
poor persons or slaughter one sheep as a sacrifice."

Volume 3, Book 28, Number 42:
Narrated Ka'b bin 'Umra:
Allah's Apostle stood beside me at Al-Hudaibiya and the lice were falling
from my head in great number. He asked me, "Have your lice troubled you?"
I replied in the affirmative. He ordered me to get my head shaved. Ka'b
added, "This Holy Verse:--'And if any of you is ill, or has ailment in his scalp
(2.196), etc. was revealed regarding me. "The Prophet then ordered me
either to fast three days, or to feed six poor persons with one Faraq (three
Sas) (of dates), or to slaughter a sheep, etc (sacrifice) whatever was
available.

Volume 3, Book 28, Number 43:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Ma'qal:
I sat with Ka'b bin 'Ujra and asked him about the Fidya. He replied, "This
revelation was revealed concerning my case especially, but it is also for you
in general. I was carried to Allah's Apostle and the lice were falling in great
number on my face. The Prophet said, "I have never thought that your
ailment (or struggle) has reached to such an extent as I see. Can you afford a
sheep?" I replied in the negative. He then said, "Fast for three days, or feed
six poor persons each with half a Sa of food." (1 Sa = 3 Kilograms approx.)

Volume 3, Book 28, Number 44:
Narrated Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Layla:
(Reporting the speech of Ka'b bin Umra) Allah's Apostle saw him (i.e. Ka'b)
while the lice were falling on his face. He asked (him), "Have your lice
troubled you?" He replied in the affirmative. So, he ordered him to get his
head shaved while he was at Al-Hudaibiya. At that time they were not
permitted to finish their Ihram, and were still hoping to enter Mecca. So,
Allah revealed the verses of Al-Fidya. Allah's Apostle ordered him to feed six
poor persons with one Faraq of food or to slaughter one sheep (as a
sacrifice) or to fast for three days.
Volume 3, Book 28, Number 45:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever performs Hajj to this House (Ka'ba) and does
not approach his wife for sexual relations nor commits sins (while
performing Hajj), he will come out as sinless as a newly-born child. (Just
delivered by his mother)."

Volume 3, Book 28, Number 46:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Whoever performs Hajj to this Ka'ba and does not
approach his wife for sexual relations nor commit sins (while performing
Hajj), he will come out as sinless as a new-born child, (just delivered by his
mother)."
BOOK 29. PENALTY OF HUNTING WHILE ON PILGRIMMAGE (47-90)
Volume 3, Book 29, Number 47:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Qatada:
My father set out (for Mecca) in the year of Al-Hudaibiya, and his
companions assumed Ihram, but he did not. At that time the Prophet was
informed that an enemy wanted to attack him, so the Prophet proceeded
onwards. While my father was among his companions, some of them
laughed among themselves. (My father said), "I looked up and saw an
onager. I attacked, stabbed and caught it. I then sought my companions'
help but they refused to help me. (Later) we all ate its meat. We were afraid
that we might be left behind (separated) from the Prophet so I went in
search of the Prophet and made my horse to run at a galloping speed at
times and let it go slow at an ordinary speed at other times till I met a man
from the tribe of Bani Ghifar at midnight. I asked him, "Where did you leave
the Prophet ?" He replied, "I left him at Ta'hun and he had the intention of
having the midday rest at As-Suqya. I followed the trace and joined the
Prophet and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Your people (companions) send you
their compliments, and (ask for) Allah's Blessings upon you. They are afraid
lest they may be left behind; so please wait for them.' I added, 'O Allah's
Apostle! I hunted an onager and some of its meat is with me. The Prophet
told the people to eat it though all of them were in the state of Ihram."

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 48:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Qatada:
That his father said "We proceeded with the Prophet in the year of AlHudaibiya and his companions assumed Ihram but I did not. We were
informed that some enemies were at Ghaiqa and so we went on towards
them. My companions saw an onager and some of them started laughing
among themselves. I looked and saw it. I chased it with my horse and
stabbed and caught it. I wanted some help from my companions but they
refused. (I slaughtered it all alone). We all ate from it (i.e. its meat). Then I
followed Allah's Apostle lest we should be left behind. At times I urged my
horse to run at a galloping speed and at other times at an ordinary slow
speed. On the way I met a man from the tribe of Bani Ghifar at midnight. I
asked him where he had left Allah's Apostle . The man replied that he had
left the Prophet at a place called Ta'hun and he had the intention of having
the midday rest at As-Suqya. So, I followed Allah's Apostle till I reached him
and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have been sent by my companions who send
you their greetings and compliments and ask for Allah's Mercy and Blessings
upon you. They were afraid lest the enemy might intervene between you
and them; so please wait for them." So he did. Then I said, "O Allah's
Apostle! We have hunted an onager and have some of it (i.e. its meat) left
over." Allah's Apostle told his companions to eat the meat although all of
them were in a state of Ihram."

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 49:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
We were in the company of the Prophet at a place called Al-Qaha (which is
at a distance of three stages of journey from Medina). Abu Qatada narrated
through another group of narrators: We were in the company of the
Prophet at a place called Al-Qaha and some of us had assumed Ihram while
the others had not. I noticed that some of my companions were watching
something, so I looked up and saw an onager. (I rode my horse and took the
spear and whip) but my whip fell down (and I asked them to pick it up for
me) but they said, "We will not help you by any means as we are in a state of
Ihram." So, I picked up the whip myself and attacked the onager from
behind a hillock and slaughtered it and brought it to my companions. Some
of them said, "Eat it." While some others said, "Do not eat it." So, I went to
the Prophet who was ahead of us and asked him about it, He replied, "Eat it
as it is Halal (i.e. it is legal to eat it)."

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 50:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Qatada:
That his father had told him that Allah's Apostle set out for Hajj and so did
his companions. He sent a batch of his companions by another route and
Abu Qatada was one of them. The Prophet said to them, "Proceed along the
sea-shore till we meet all together." So, they took the route of the seashore, and when they started all of them assumed Ihram except Abu
Qatada. While they were proceeding on, his companions saw a group of
onagers. Abu Qatada chased the onagers and attacked and wounded a sheonager. They got down and ate some of its meat and said to each other:
"How do we eat the meat of the game while we are in a state of Ihram?" So,
we (they) carried the rest of the she-onager's meat, and when they met
Allah's Apostle they asked, saying, "O Allah's Apostle! We assumed Ihram
with the exception of Abu Qatada and we saw (a group) of onagers. Abu
Qatada attacked them and wounded a she-onager from them. Then we got
down and ate from its meat. Later, we said, (to each other), 'How do we eat
the meat of the game and we are in a state of Ihram?' So, we carried the rest
of its meat. The Prophet asked, "Did anyone of you order Abu Qatada to
attack it or point at it?" They replied in the negative. He said, "Then eat what
is left of its meat."

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 51:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
From As-Sa'b bin Jath-thama Al-Laithi that the latter presented an onager to
Allah's Apostle while he was at Al-Abwa' or at Waddan, and he refused it. On
noticing the signs of some unpleasant feeling of disappointment on his (AsSab's) face, the Prophet said to him, "I have only returned it because I am
Muhrim."

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 52:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "It is not sinful of a Muhrim to kill five kinds of animals."

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 53:
Narrated One of the wives of the Prophet:
The Prophet said, "A Muhrim can kill (five kinds of animals.)"

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 54:
Narrated Hafsa:
Allah's Apostle said, "It is not sinful (of a Muhrim) to kill five kinds of
animals, namely: the crow, the kite, the mouse, the scorpion and the rabid
dog."

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 55:
Narrated Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said, "Five kinds of animals are harmful and could be killed in
the Haram (Sanctuary). These are: the crow, the kite, the scorpion, the
mouse and the rabid dog."

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 56:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
While we were in the company of the Prophet in a cave at Mina, when Suratwal-Mursalat were revealed and he recited it and I heard it (directly) from his
mouth as soon as he recited its revelation. Suddenly a snake sprang at us
and the Prophet said (ordered us): "Kill it." We ran to kill it but it escaped
quickly. The Prophet said, "It has escaped your evil and you too have
escaped its evil."
Volume 3, Book 29, Number 57:
Narrated 'Aisha the wife of the Prophet:
Allah's Apostle called the salamander a bad animal, but I did not hear him
ordering it to be killed."

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 58:
Narrated Said bin Abu Said Al-Maqburi:
Abu Shuraih, Al-'Adawi said that he had said to 'Amr bin Sa'id when he was
sending the troops to Mecca (to fight 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair), "O Chief!
Allow me to tell you what Allah's Apostle said on the day following the
Conquest of Mecca. My ears heard that and my heart understood it
thoroughly and I saw with my own eyes the Prophet when he, after
Glorifying and Praising Allah, started saying, 'Allah, not the people, made
Mecca a sanctuary, so anybody who has belief in Allah and the Last Day
should neither shed blood in it, nor should he cut down its trees. If anybody
tells (argues) that fighting in it is permissible on the basis that Allah's
Apostle did fight in Mecca, say to him, 'Allah allowed His Apostle and did not
allow you.' "Allah allowed me only for a few hours on that day (of the
conquest) and today its sanctity is valid as it was before. So, those who are
present should inform those who are absent (concerning this fact." Abu
Shuraih was asked, "What did 'Amr reply?" He said, ('Amr said) 'O Abu
Shuraih! I know better than you in this respect Mecca does not give
protection to a sinner, a murderer or a thief."

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 59:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
"The Prophet said, 'Allah has made Mecca, a sanctuary, so it was a sanctuary
before me and will continue to be a sanctuary after me. It was made legal
for me (i.e. I was allowed to fight in it) for a few hours of a day. It is not
allowed to uproot its shrubs or to cut its trees, or to chase (or disturb) its
game, or to pick up its luqata (fallen things) except by a person who would
announce that (what he has found) publicly.' Al-'Abbas said, 'O Allah's
Apostle! Except Al-ldhkhir (a kind of grass) (for it is used) by our goldsmiths
and for our graves.' The Prophet then said, 'Except Al-idhkhir.' " 'Ikrima said,
'Do you know what "chasing or disturbing" the game means? It means
driving it out of the shade to occupy its place."

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 60:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
their blacksmiths and for their domestic purposes)." So, the Prophet s

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 61:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Allah's Apostle was cupped while he was in a state of Ihram.

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 62:
Narrated Ibn Buhaina: The Prophet, while in the state of Ihram, was cupped
at the middle of his head at Liha-Jamal.

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 63:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet married Maimuna while he was in the state of Ihram, (only the
ceremonies of marriage were held).

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 64:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:
A person stood up and asked, "O Allah's: Apostle! What clothes may be
worn in the state of Ihram?" The Prophet replied, "Do not wear a shirt or
trousers, or any headgear (e.g. a turban), or a hooded cloak; but if
somebody has no shoes he can wear leather stockings provided they are cut
short off the ankles, and also, do not wear anything perfumed with Wars or
saffron, and the Muhrima (a woman in the state of Ihram) should not cover
her face, or wear gloves."

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 65:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
A man was crushed to death by his she-camel and was brought to Allah's
Apostle who said, "Give him a bath and shroud him, but do not cover his
head, and do not bring any perfume near to him, as he will be resurrected
reciting Talbiya."

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 66:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Hunain:
Abdullah bin Al-Abbas and Al-Miswar bin Makhrama differed at Al-Abwa'; Ibn
'Abbas said that a Muhrim could wash his head; while Al-Miswar maintained
that he should not do so. 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas sent me to Abu Aiyub AlAnsari and I found him bathing between the two wooden posts (of the well)
and was screened with a sheet of cloth. I greeted him and he asked who I
was. I replied, "I am 'Abdullah bin Hunain and I have been sent to you by Ibn
'Abbas to ask you how Allah's Apostle used to wash his head while in the
state of lhram." Abu Aiyub Al-Ansarl caught hold of the sheet of cloth and
lowered it till his head appeared before me, and then told somebody to pour
water on his head. He poured water on his head, and he (Abu Aiyub) rubbed
his head with his hands by bringing them from back to front and from front
to back and said, "I saw the Prophet doing like this."
Volume 3, Book 29, Number 67:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
I heard the Prophet delivering a sermon at 'Arafat saying, "If a Muhrim does
not find slippers, he could wear Khuffs (but he has to cut short the Khuffs
below the ankles), and if he does not find an Izar (a waist sheet for
wrapping the lower half of the body) he could wear trousers."

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 68:
Narrated Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle was asked what sort of clothes a Muhrim should wear. He
replied, "He should not wear a shirt, turbans, trousers, a hooded cloak, or a
dress perfumed with saffron or Wars; and if slippers are not available he can
wear Khuffs but he should cut them so that they reach below the ankles.

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 69:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet delivered a sermon at 'Arafat and said, "Whoever does not get
an Izar can wear trousers, and whoever cannot get a pair of shoes can wear
Khuffs."

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 70:
Narrated Al-Bara:
The Prophet assumed Ihram for Umra in the month of Dhul-Qa'da but the
(pagan) people of Mecca refused to admit him into Mecca till he agreed on
the condition that he would not bring into Mecca any arms but sheathed.

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 71:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet fixed Dhul-Hulaifa as the Miqat (the place for assuming Ihram)
for the people of Medina, and Qaran-al-Manazil for the people of Najd, and
Yalamlam for the people of Yemen. These Mawaqit are for those people and
also for those who come through these Mawaqit (from places other than
the above-mentioned) with the intention of (performing) Hajj and Umra.
And those living inside these Mawaqit can assume Ihram from the place
where they start; even the people of Mecca can assume Ihram from Mecca.

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 72:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle entered Mecca in the year of its Conquest wearing an
Arabian helmet on his head and when the Prophet took it off, a person came
and said, "Ibn Khatal is holding the covering of the Ka'ba (taking refuge in
the Ka'ba)." The Prophet said, "Kill him."

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 73:
Narrated Ya'li:
ame as you do in your Hajj." A man bit the hand of another man but in

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 75:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
While a man was standing with the Prophet at 'Arafat, he fell from his
Mount and his neck was crushed by it. The Prophet said, "Wash the
deceased with water and Sidr and shroud him in two pieces of cloth, and
neither perfume him nor cover his head, for Allah will resurrect him on the
Day of Resurrection and he will be reciting Talbiya."

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 76:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
A man was in the company of the Prophet and his she-camel crushed his
neck while he was in a state of Ihram and he died Allah's Apostle said, "Wash
him with water and Sidr and shroud him in his two garments; neither
perfume him nor cover his head, for he will be resurrected on the Day of
Resurrection, reciting Talbiya."

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 77:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
A woman from the tribe of Juhaina came to the Prophet and said, "My
mother had vowed to perform Hajj but she died before performing it. May I
perform Hajj on my mother's behalf?" The Prophet replied, "Perform Hajj on
her behalf. Had there been a debt on your mother, would you have paid it or
not? So, pay Allah's debt as He has more right to be paid."

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 78:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
A woman from the tribe of Khath'am came in the year (of ,Hajjat-ul-wada' of
the Prophet ) and said, "O Allah's Apostle! My father has come under Allah's
obligation of performing Hajj but he is a very old man and cannot sit
properly on his Mount. Will the obligation be fulfilled if I perform Hajj on his
behalf?" The Prophet replied in the affirmative.
Volume 3, Book 29, Number 79:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
Al-Fadl was riding behind the Prophet and a woman from the tribe of
Khath'am came up. Al-Fadl started looking at her and she looked at him. The
Prophet turned Al-Fadl's face to the other side. She said, "My father has
come under Allah's obligation of performing Hajj but he is a very old man
and cannot sit properly on his Mount. Shall I perform Hajj on his behalf? The
Prophet replied in the affirmative. That happened during Hajjat-ul-wada' of
the Prophet .

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 80:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet sent me (to Mina) with the luggage from Jam'(i.e. Al-Muzdalifa)
at night.

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 81:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
I came riding on my she-ass and had (just) then attained the age of puberty.
Allah's Apostle was praying at Mina. I passed in front of a part of the first
row and then dismounted from it, and the animal started grazing. I aligned
with the people behind Allah's Apostle (The sub-narrator added that
happened in Mina during the Prophet's Hajjat-ul-wada.)

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 82:
Narrated As-Sa'ib bin Yazid:
(While in the company of my parents) I was made to perform Hajj with
Allah's Apostle and I was a seven-year-old boy then. (Fatch-Al-Bari, p.443,
Vol.4)
Volume 3, Book 29, Number 83:
Narrated Al-Ju'aid bin 'AbdurRahman:
I heard 'Umar bin 'Abdul Azlz telling about As-Sa'ib bin Yazid that he had
performed Hajj (while carried) with the belongings of the Prophet

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 84:
Narrated Aisha (mother of the faithful believers):
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shouldn't we participate in Holy battles and Jihad
along with you?" He replied, "The best and the most superior Jihad (for
women) is Hajj which is accepted by Allah." 'Aisha added: Ever since I heard
that from Allah's Apostle I have determined not to miss Hajj.

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 85:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "A woman should not travel except with a Dhu-Mahram
(her husband or a man with whom that woman cannot marry at all
according to the Islamic Jurisprudence), and no man may visit her except in
the presence of a Dhu-Mahram." A man got up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I
intend to go to such and such an army and my wife wants to perform Hajj."
The Prophet said (to him), "Go along with her (to Hajj)."

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 86:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
When the Prophet returned after performing his Hajj, he asked Um Sinan AlAnsari, "What did forbid you to perform Hajj?" She replied, "Father of soand-so (i.e. her husband) had two camels and he performed Hajj on one of
them, and the second is used for the irrigation of our land." The Prophe
said (to her), "Perform 'Umra in the month of Ramadan, (as it is equivalent
to Hajj or Hajj with me (in reward)."

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 87:
Narrated Qaza'a, the slave of Ziyad: Abu Said who participated in twelve
Ghazawat with the Prophet said, "I heard four things from Allah's Apostle
(or I narrate them from the Prophet ) which won my admiration and
appreciation. They are:
1. "No lady should travel without her husband or without a Dhu-Mahram for
a two-days' journey.
2. No fasting is permissible on two days of 'Id-al-Fitr, and 'Id-al-Adha.
3. No prayer (may be offered) after two prayers: after the 'Asr prayer till the
sun set and after the morning prayer till the sun rises.
4. Not to travel (for visiting) except for three mosques: Masjid-al-Haram (in
Mecca), my Mosque (in Medina), and Masjid-al-Aqsa (in Jerusalem)."

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 88:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet saw an old man walking, supported by his two sons, and asked
about him. The people informed him that he had vowed to go on foot (to
the Ka'ba). He said, "Allah is not in need of this old man's torturing himself,"
and ordered him to ride.

Volume 3, Book 29, Number 89:
Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir:
My sister vowed to go on foot to the Ka'ba, and she asked me to take the
verdict of the Prophet about it. So, I did and the Prophet said, "She should
walk and also should ride.
Volume 3, Book 29, Number 90:
Narrated Abu-l-Khair from 'Uqba as above.
BOOK 30. VIRTUES OF MADINAH (91-114)
Volume 3, Book 30, Number 91:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "Medina is a sanctuary from that place to that. Its trees
should not be cut and no heresy should be innovated nor any sin should be
committed in it, and whoever innovates in it an heresy or commits sins (bad
deeds), then he will incur the curse of Allah, the angels, and all the people."
(See Hadith No. 409, Vol 9).

Volume 3, Book 30, Number 92:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet came to Medina and ordered a mosque to be built and said, "O
Bani Najjar! Suggest to me the price (of your land)." They said, "We do not
want its price except from Allah" (i.e. they wished for a reward from Allah
for giving up their land freely). So, the Prophet ordered the graves of the
pagans to be dug out and the land to be levelled, and the date-palm trees to
be cut down. The cut date-palms were fixed in the direction of the Qibla of
the mosque.

Volume 3, Book 30, Number 93:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "I have made Medina a sanctuary between its two
(Harrat) mountains." The Prophet went to the tribe of Bani Haritha and said
(to them), "I see that you have gone out of the sanctuary," but looking
around, he added, "No, you are inside the sanctuary."

Volume 3, Book 30, Number 94:
Narrated 'Ali:
We have nothing except the Book of Allah and this written paper from the
Prophet (where-in is written:) Medina is a sanctuary from the 'Air Mountain
to such and such a place, and whoever innovates in it an heresy or commits
a sin, or gives shelter to such an innovator in it will incur the curse of Allah,
the angels, and all the people, none of his compulsory or optional good
deeds of worship will be accepted. And the asylum (of protection) granted
by any Muslim is to be secured (respected) by all the other Muslims; and
whoever betrays a Muslim in this respect incurs the curse of Allah, the
angels, and all the people, and none of his compulsory or optional good
deeds of worship will be accepted, and whoever (freed slave) befriends
(take as masters) other than his manumitters without their permission
incurs the curse of Allah, the angels, and all the people, and none of his
compulsory or optional good deeds of worship will be accepted.

Volume 3, Book 30, Number 95:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "I was ordered to migrate to a town which will swallow
(conquer) other towns and is called Yathrib and that is Medina, and it turns
out (bad) persons as a furnace removes the impurities of iron.

Volume 3, Book 30, Number 96:
Narrated Abu Humaid:
We came with the Prophet from Tabuk, and when we reached near Medina,
the Prophet said, "This is Tabah."

Volume 3, Book 30, Number 97:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
If I saw deers grazing in Medina, I would not chase them, for Allah's Apostle
said, "(Medina) is a sanctuary between its two mountains."

Volume 3, Book 30, Number 98:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "The people will leave Medina in spite of the
best state it will have, and none except the wild birds and the beasts of prey
will live in it, and the last persons who will die will be two shepherds from
the tribe of Muzaina, who will be driving their sheep towards Medina, but
will find nobody in it, and when they reach the valley of Thaniyat-al-Wada',
they will fall down on their faces dead."

Volume 3, Book 30, Number 99:
Narrated Abu Zuhair:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Yemen will be conquered and some people
will migrate (from Medina) and will urge their families, and those who will
obey them to migrate (to Yemen) although Medina will be better for them;
if they but knew. Sham will also be conquered and some people will migrate
(from Medina) and will urge their families and those who will obey them, to
migrate (to Sham) although Medina will be better for them; if they but
knew. 'Iraq will be conquered and some people will migrate (from Medina)
and will urge their families and those who will obey them to migrate (to
'Iraq) although Medina will be better for them; if they but knew."

Volume 3, Book 30, Number 100:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Verily, Belief returns and goes back to Medina as a
snake returns and goes back to its hole (when in danger)."
Volume 3, Book 30, Number 101:
Narrated Sad:
I heard the Prophet saying, "None plots against the people of Medina but
that he will be dissolved (destroyed) like the salt is dissolved in water."

Volume 3, Book 30, Number 102:
Narrated Usama:
Once the Prophet stood at the top of a (looked out from upon one) castle
amongst the castles (or the high buildings) of Medina and said, "Do you see
what I see? (No doubt) I see the spots where afflictions will take place
among your houses (and these afflictions will be) as numerous as the spots
where rain-drops fall."

Volume 3, Book 30, Number 103:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
The Prophet said, "The terror caused by Al-Masih Ad-Dajjal will not enter
Medina and at that time Medina will have seven gates and there will be two
angels at each gate guarding them."

Volume 3, Book 30, Number 104:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "There are angels guarding the entrances (or roads) of
Medina, neither plague nor Ad-Dajjal will be able to enter it."

Volume 3, Book 30, Number 105:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "There will be no town which Ad-Dajjal will not enter
except Mecca and Medina, and there will be no entrance (road) (of both
Mecca and Medina) but the angels will be standing in rows guarding it
against him, and then Medina will shake with its inhabitants thrice (i.e. three
earth-quakes will take place) and Allah will expel all the nonbelievers and
the hypocrites from it."

Volume 3, Book 30, Number 106:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle told us a long narrative about Ad-Dajjal, and among the many
things he mentioned, was his saying, "Ad-Dajjal will come and it will be
forbidden for him to pass through the entrances of Medina. He will land in
some of the salty barren areas (outside) Medina; on that day the best man
or one of the best men will come up to him and say, 'I testify that you are
the same Dajjal whose description was given to us by Allah's Apostle .' AdDajjal will say to the people, 'If I kill this man and bring him back to life again,
will you doubt my claim?' They will say, 'No.' Then Ad-Dajjal will kill that man
and bring him back to life. That man will say, 'Now I know your reality better
than before.' Ad-Dajjal will say, 'I want to kill him but I cannot.' "

Volume 3, Book 30, Number 107:
Narrated Jabir:
A bedouin came to the Prophet and gave a pledge of allegiance for
embracing Islam. The next day he came with fever and said (to the Prophet
), "Please cancel my pledge (of embracing Islam and of emigrating to
Medina)." The Prophet refused (that request) three times and said, "Medina
is like a furnace, it expels out the impurities (bad persons) and selects the
good ones and makes them perfect."

Volume 3, Book 30, Number 108:
Narrated Zaid bin Thabit:
When the Prophet went out for (the battle of) Uhud, some of his
companions (hypocrites) returned (home). A party of the believers
remarked that they would kill those (hypocrites) who had returned, but
another party said that they would not kill them. So, this Divine Inspiration
was revealed: "Then what is the matter with you that you are divided into
two parties concerning the hypocrites." (4.88) The Prophet said, "Medina
expels the bad persons from it, as fire expels the impurities of iron."

Volume 3, Book 30, Number 109:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "O Allah! Bestow on Medina twice the blessings You
bestowed on Mecca."

Volume 3, Book 30, Number 110:
Narrated Anas:
Whenever the Prophet returned from a journey and observed the walls of
Medina, he would make his Mount go fast, and if he was on an animal (i.e. a
horse), he would make it gallop because of his love for Medina.

Volume 3, Book 30, Number 111:
Narrated Anas:
(The people of) Bani Salama intended to shift near the mosque (of the
Prophet) but Allah's Apostle disliked to see Medina vacated and said, "O the
people of Bani Salama! Don't you think that you will be rewarded for your
footsteps which you take towards the mosque?" So, they stayed at their old
places.
Volume 3, Book 30, Number 112:
Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet said, "There is a garden from the
gardens of Paradise between my house and my pulpit, and my pulpit is on
my Lake Fount (Al-Kauthar)."

Volume 3, Book 30, Number 113:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When Allah's Apostle reached Medina, Abu Bakr and Bilal became ill. When
Abu Bakr's fever got worse, he would recite (this poetic verse): "Everybody
is staying alive with his People, yet Death is nearer to him than His shoe
laces." And Bilal, when his fever deserted him, would recite: "Would that I
could stay overnight in A valley wherein I would be Surrounded by Idhkhir
and Jalil (kinds of good-smelling grass). Would that one day I could Drink the
water of the Majanna, and Would that (The two mountains) Shama and Tafil
would appear to me!" The Prophet said, "O Allah! Curse Shaiba bin Rabi'a
and 'Utba bin Rabi'a and Umaiya bin Khalaf as they turned us out of our land
to the land of epidemics." Allah's Apostle then said, "O Allah! Make us love
Medina as we love Mecca or even more than that. O Allah! Give blessings in
our Sa and our Mudd (measures symbolizing food) and make the climate of
Medina suitable for us, and divert its fever towards Aljuhfa." Aisha added:
When we reached Medina, it was the most unhealthy of Allah's lands, and
the valley of Bathan (the valley of Medina) used to flow with impure colored
water.

Volume 3, Book 30, Number 114:
Narrated Zaid bin Aslam from his father:
Umar said, O Allah! Grant me martyrdom in Your cause, and let my death be
in the city of Your Apostle."


BOOK 31. FASTING (115-225)
Volume 3, Book 31, Number 115:
Narrated Talha bin 'Ubaid-Ullah:
A bedouin with unkempt hair came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Inform me what Allah has made compulsory for me as regards the
prayers." He replied: "You have to offer perfectly the five compulsory
prayers in a day and night (24 hours), unless you want to pray Nawafil." The
bedouin further asked, "Inform me what Allah has made compulsory for me
as regards fasting." He replied, "You have to fast during the whole month of
Ramadan, unless you want to fast more as Nawafil." The bedouin further
asked, "Tell me how much Zakat Allah has enjoined on me." Thus, Allah's
Apostle informed him about all the rules (i.e. fundamentals) of Islam. The
bedouin then said, "By Him Who has honored you, I will neither perform any
Nawafil nor will I decrease what Allah has enjoined on me. Allah's Apostle
said, "If he is saying the truth, he will succeed (or he will be granted
Paradise)."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 116:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet observed the fast on the 10th of Muharram ('Ashura), and
ordered (Muslims) to fast on that day, but when the fasting of the month of
Ramadan was prescribed, the fasting of the 'Ashura' was abandoned.
'Abdullah did not use to fast on that day unless it coincided with his routine
fasting by chance.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 117:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(The tribe of) Quraish used to fast on the day of Ashura' in the Pre-lslamic
period, and then Allah's Apostle ordered (Muslims) to fast on it till the
fasting in the month of Ramadan was prescribed; whereupon the Prophet
said, "He who wants to fast (on 'Ashura') may fast, and he who does not
want to fast may not fast."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 118:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Fasting is a shield (or a screen or a shelter). So, the
person observing fasting should avoid sexual relation with his wife and
should not behave foolishly and impudently, and if somebody fights with
him or abuses him, he should tell him twice, 'I am fasting." The Prophet
added, "By Him in Whose Hands my soul is, the smell coming out from the
mouth of a fasting person is better in the sight of Allah than the smell of
musk. (Allah says about the fasting person), 'He has left his food, drink and
desires for My sake. The fast is for Me. So I will reward (the fasting person)
for it and the reward of good deeds is multiplied ten times."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 119:
Narrated Abu Wail from Hudhaifa:
Umar asked the people, "Who remembers the narration of the Prophet
about the affliction?" Hudhaifa said, "I heard the Prophet saying, 'The
affliction of a person in his property, family and neighbors is expiated by his
prayers, fasting, and giving in charity." 'Umar said, "I do not ask about that,
but I ask about those afflictions which will spread like the waves of the sea."
Hudhaifa replied, "There is a closed gate in front of those afflictions." 'Umar
asked, "Will that gate be opened or broken?" He replied, "It will be broken."
'Umar said, "Then the gate will not be closed again till the Day of
Resurrection." We said to Masruq, "Would you ask Hudhaifa whether 'Umar
knew what that gate symbolized?" He asked him and he replied "He ('Umar)
knew it as one knows that there will be night before tomorrow, morning.
Volume 3, Book 31, Number 120:
Narrated Sahl:
The Prophet said, "There is a gate in Paradise called Ar-Raiyan, and those
who observe fasts will enter through it on the Day of Resurrection and none
except them will enter through it. It will be said, 'Where are those who used
to observe fasts?' They will get up, and none except them will enter through
it. After their entry the gate will be closed and nobody will enter through it."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 121:
'Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever gives two kinds (of things or property) in
charity for Allah's Cause, will be called from the gates of Paradise and will be
addressed, 'O slaves of Allah! Here is prosperity.' So, whoever was amongst
the people who used to offer their prayers, will be called from the gate of
the prayer; and whoever was amongst the people who used to participate in
Jihad, will be called from the gate of Jihad; and whoever was amongst those
who used to observe fasts, will be called from the gate of Ar-Raiyan;
whoever was amongst those who used to give in charity, will be called from
the gate of charity." Abu Bakr said, "Let my parents be sacrificed for you, O
Allah's Apostle! No distress or need will befall him who will be called from
those gates. Will there be any one who will be called from all these gates?"
The Prophet replied, "Yes, and I hope you will be one of them."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 122:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "When Ramadan begins, the gates of Paradise are
opened."
Volume 3, Book 31, Number 123:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "When the month of Ramadan starts, the gates of the
heaven are opened and the gates of Hell are closed and the devils are
chained."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 124:
Narrated Ibn Umar: I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "When you see the
crescent (of the month of Ramadan), start fasting, and when you see the
crescent (of the month of Shawwal), stop fasting; and if the sky is overcast
(and you can't see It) then regard the crescent (month) of Ramadan (as of
30 days)".

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 125:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Whoever established prayers on the night of Qadr out of
sincere faith and hoping for a reward from Allah, then all his previous sins
will be forgiven; and whoever fasts in the month of Ramadan out of sincere
faith, and hoping for a reward from Allah, then all his previous sins will be
forgiven."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 126:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet was the most generous amongst the people, and he used to be
more so in the month of Ramadan when Gabriel visited him, and Gabriel
used to meet him on every night of Ramadan till the end of the month. The
Prophet used to recite the Holy Qur'an to Gabriel, and when Gabriel met
him, he used to be more generous than a fast wind (which causes rain and
welfare).
Volume 3, Book 31, Number 127:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Whoever does not give up forged speech and evil
actions, Allah is not in need of his leaving his food and drink (i.e. Allah will
not accept his fasting.)"

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 128:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah said, 'All the deeds of Adam's sons (people) are
for them, except fasting which is for Me, and I will give the reward for it.'
Fasting is a shield or protection from the fire and from committing sins. If
one of you is fasting, he should avoid sexual relation with his wife and
quarreling, and if somebody should fight or quarrel with him, he should say,
'I am fasting.' By Him in Whose Hands my soul is' The unpleasant smell
coming out from the mouth of a fasting person is better in the sight of Allah
than the smell of musk. There are two pleasures for the fasting person, one
at the time of breaking his fast, and the other at the time when he will meet
his Lord; then he will be pleased because of his fasting."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 129:
Narrated 'Alqama: While I was walking with 'Abdullah he said, "We were in
the company of the Prophet and he said, 'He who can afford to marry
should marry, because it will help him refrain from looking at other women,
and save his private parts from looking at other women, and save his private
parts from committing illegal sexual relation; and he who cannot afford to
marry is advised to fast, as fasting will diminish his sexual power."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 130:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
Allah's Apostle mentioned Ramadan and said, "Do not fast unless you see
the crescent (of Ramadan), and do not give up fasting till you see the
crescent (of Shawwal), but if the sky is overcast (if you cannot see it), then
act on estimation (i.e. count Sha'ban as 30 days)."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 131:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "The month (can be) 29 nights (i.e. days), and do not
fast till you see the moon, and if the sky is overcast, then complete Sha'ban
as thirty days."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 132:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "The month is like this and this," (at the same time he
showed the fingers of both his hands thrice) and left out one thumb on the
third time.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 133:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet or Abu-l-Qasim said, "Start fasting on seeing the crescent (of
Ramadan), and give up fasting on seeing the crescent (of Shawwal), and if
the sky is overcast (and you cannot see it), complete thirty days of Sha'ban."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 134:
Narrated Um Salama:
The Prophet vowed to keep aloof from his wives for a period of one month,
and after the completion of 29 days he went either in the morning or in the
afternoon to his wives. Someone said to him "You vowed that you would
not go to your wives for one month." He replied, "The month is of 29 days."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 135:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle vowed to keep aloof from his wives for one month, and he
had dislocation of his leg. So, he stayed in a Mashruba for 29 nights and then
came down. Some people said, "O Allah's Apostle! You vowed to stay aloof
for one month," He replied, "The month is of 29 days."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 136:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
The Prophet said, "The two months of 'Id i.e. Ramadan and Dhul-Hijja, do
not decrease (in superiority)."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 137:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "We are an illiterate nation; we neither write, nor know
accounts. The month is like this and this, i.e. sometimes of 29 days and
sometimes of thirty days."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 138:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "None of you should fast a day or two before the month
of Ramadan unless he has the habit of fasting (Nawafil) (and if his fasting
coincides with that day) then he can fast that day."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 139:
Narrated Al-Bara:
It was the custom among the companions of Muhammad that if any of them
was fasting and the food was presented (for breaking his fast), but he slept
before eating, he would not eat that night and the following day till sunset.
Qais bin Sirma-al-Ansari was fasting and came to his wife at the time of Iftar
(breaking one's fast) and asked her whether she had anything to eat. She
replied, "No, but I would go and bring some for you." He used to do hard
work during the day, so he was overwhelmed by sleep and slept. When his
wife came and saw him, she said, "Disappointment for you." When it was
midday on the following day, he fainted and the Prophet was informed
about the whole matter and the following verses were revealed: "You are
permitted To go to your wives (for sexual relation) At the night of fasting."
So, they were overjoyed by it. And then Allah also revealed: "And eat and
drink Until the white thread Of dawn appears to you Distinct from the black
thread (of the night)." (2.187)

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 140:
Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim:
When the above verses were revealed: 'Until the white thread appears to
you, distinct from the black thread,' I took two (hair) strings, one black and
the other white, and kept them under my pillow and went on looking at
them throughout the night but could not make anything out of it. So, the
next morning I went to Allah's Apostle and told him the whole story. He
explained to me, "That verse means the darkness of the night and the
whiteness of the dawn."
Volume 3, Book 31, Number 141:
Narrated Sahl bin Saud:
When the following verses were revealed: 'Eat and drink until the white
thread appears to you, distinct from the black thread' and of dawn was not
revealed, some people who intended to fast, tied black and white threads to
their legs and went on eating till they differentiated between the two. Allah
then revealed the words, 'of dawn', and it became clear that meant night
and day.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 142:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Bilal used to pronounce the Adhan at night, so Allah's Apostle? said, "Carry
on taking your meals (eat and drink) till Ibn Um Maktum pronounces the
Adhan, for he does not pronounce it till it is dawn.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 143:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
I used to take my Suhur meals with my family and then hurry up for
presenting myself for the (Fajr) prayer with Allah's Apostle.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 144:
Narrated Anas:
Zaid bin Thabit said, "We took the Suhur with the Prophet . Then he stood
for the prayer." I asked, "What was the interval between the Suhur and the
Adhan?" He replied, "The interval was sufficient to recite fifty verses of the
Quran."
Volume 3, Book 31, Number 145:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet fasted for days continuously; the people also did the same but
it was difficult for them. So, the Prophet forbade them (to fast continuously
for more than one day). They slid, "But you fast without break (no food was
taken in the evening or in the morning)." The Prophet replied, "I am not like
you, for I am provided with food and drink (by Allah)."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 146:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "Take Suhur as there is a blessing in it."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 147:
Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa:
Once the Prophet ordered a person on 'Ashura' (the tenth of Muharram) to
announce, "Whoever has eaten, should not eat any more, but fast, and who
has not eaten should not eat, but complete his fast (till the end of the day).

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 148:
Narrated 'Aisha and Um Salama:
At times Allah's Apostle used to get up in the morning in the state of Janaba
after having sexual relations with his wives. He would then take a bath and
fast.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 149:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to kiss and embrace (his wives) while he was fasting, and
he had more power to control his desires than any of you. Said Jabir, "The
person who gets discharge after casting a look (on his wife) should
complete his fast."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 150:
Narrated Hisham's father:
Aisha said, "Allah's Apostle used to kiss some of his wives while he was
fasting," and then she smiled.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 151:
Narrated Zainab:
(daughter of Um Salama) that her mother said, "While I was (lying) with
Allah's Apostle underneath a woolen sheet, I got the menstruation, and
then slipped away and put on the clothes (which I used to wear) in menses.
He asked, "What is the matter? Did you get your menses?" I replied in the
affirmative and then entered underneath that woolen sheet. I and Allah's
Apostle used to take a bath from one water pot and he used to kiss me
while he was fasting."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 152:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(At times) in Ramadan the Prophet used to take a bath in the morning not
because of a wet dream and would continue his fast.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 153:
Narrated Abu Bakr bin 'Abdur-Rahman:
My father and I went to 'Aisha and she said, "I testify that Allah's Apostle at
times used to get up in the morning in a state of Janaba from sexual
intercourse, not from a wet dream and then he would fast that day." Then
he went to Um Salama and she also narrated a similar thing.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 154:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "If somebody eats or drinks forgetfully then he should
complete his fast, for what he has eaten or drunk, has been given to him by
Allah." Narrated 'Amir bin Rabi'a, "I saw the Prophet cleaning his teeth with
Siwak while he was fasting so many times as I can't count." And narrated
Abu Huraira, "The Prophet said, 'But for my fear that it would be hard for my
followers, I would have ordered them to clean their teeth with Siwak on
every performance of ablution." The same is narrated by Jabir and Zaid bin
Khalid from the Prophet who did not differentiate between a fasting and a
nonfasting person in this respect (using Siwak).
Aisha said, "The Prophet said, "It (i.e. Siwak) is a purification for the mouth
and it is a way of seeking Allah's pleasures." Ata' and Qatada said, "There is
no harm in swallowing the resultant saliva."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 155:
Narrated Humran:
I saw 'Uthman performing ablution; he washed his hands thrice, rinsed his
mouth and then washed his nose, by putting water in it and then blowing it
out, and washed his face thrice, and then washed his right forearm up to the
elbow thrice, and then the left-forearm up to the elbow thrice, then
smeared his head with water, washed his right foot thrice, and then his left
foot thrice and said, "I saw Allah's Apostle performing ablution similar to my
present ablution, and then he said, 'Whoever performs ablution like my
present ablution and then offers two Rakat in which he does not think of
worldly things, all his previous sins will be forgiven."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 156:
Narrated 'Aisha:
A man came to the Prophet and said that he had been burnt (ruined). The
Prophet asked him what was the matter. He replied, "I had sexual
intercourse with my wife in Ramadan (while I was fasting)." Then a basket
full of dates was brought to the Prophet and he asked, "Where is the burnt
(ruined) man?" He replied, "I am present." The Prophet told him to give that
basket in charity (as expiation).

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 157:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
While we were sitting with the Prophet a man came and said, "O Allah's
Apostle! I have been ruined." Allah's Apostle asked what was the matter
with him. He replied "I had sexual intercourse with my wife while I was
fasting." Allah's Apostle asked him, "Can you afford to manumit a slave?" He
replied in the negative. Allah's Apostle asked him, "Can you fast for two
successive months?" He replied in the negative. The Prophet asked him,
"Can you afford to feed sixty poor persons?" He replied in the negative. The
Prophet kept silent and while we were in that state, a big basket full of
dates was brought to the Prophet . He asked, "Where is the questioner?" He
replied, "I (am here)." The Prophet said (to him), "Take this (basket of
dates) and give it in charity." The man said, "Should I give it to a person
poorer than I? By Allah; there is no family between its (i.e. Medina's) two
mountains who are poorer than I." The Prophet smiled till his pre-molar
teeth became visible and then said, 'Feed your family with it."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 158:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man came to the Prophet and said, "I had sexual intercourse with my wife
on Ramadan (while fasting)." The Prophet asked him, "Can you afford to
manumit a slave?" He replied in the negative. The Prophet asked him, "Can
you fast for two successive months?" He replied in the negative. He asked
him, "Can you afford to feed sixty poor persons?" He replied in the negative.
(Abu Huraira added): Then a basket full of dates was brought to the Prophet
and he said (to that man), "Feed (poor people) with this by way of
atonement." He said, "(Should I feed it) to poorer people than we? There is
no poorer house than ours between its (Medina's) mountains." The Prophet
said, "Then feed your family with it."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 159:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet was cupped while he was in the state of lhram, and also while
he was observing a fast.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 160:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet was cupped while he was fasting.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 161:
Narrated Thabit Al-Bunani:
Anas bin Malik was asked whether they disliked the cupping for a fasting
person. He replied in the negative and said, "Only if it causes weakness."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 162:
Narrated Ibn Abi Aufa:
We were in the company of Allah's Apostle on a journey. He said to a man,
"Get down and mix Sawiq (powdered barley) with water for me." The man
said, "The sun (has not set yet), O Allah's Apostle." The Prophet again said
to him, "Get down and mix Sawiq with water for me." The man again said,
"O Allah's Apostle! The sun!" The Prophet said to him (for the third time)
"Get down and mix Sawiq with water for me." The man dismounted and
mixed Sawiq with water for him. The Prophet drank it and then beckoned
with his hand (towards the East) and said, "When you see the night falling
from this side, then a fasting person should break his fast."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 163:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Hamza bin 'Amr Al-Aslami said, "O Allah's Apostle! I fast continuously."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 164:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) Hamza bin 'Amr Al-Aslami asked the Prophet,
"Should I fast while traveling?" The Prophet replied, "You may fast if you
wish, and you may not fast if you wish."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 165:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle set out for Mecca in Ramadan and he fasted, and when he
reached Al-Kadid, he broke his fast and the people (with him) broke their
fast too. (Abu 'Abdullah said, "Al-Kadid is a land covered with water
between Usfan and Qudaid.")
Volume 3, Book 31, Number 166:
Narrated Abu Ad-Darda:
We set out with Allah's Apostle on one of his journeys on a very hot day, and
it was so hot that one had to put his hand over his head because of the
severity of heat. None of us was fasting except the Prophet and Ibn
Rawaha.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 167:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle was on a journey and saw a crowd of people, and a man was
being shaded (by them). He asked, "What is the matter?" They said, "He (the
man) is fasting." The Prophet said, "It is not righteousness that you fast on a
journey."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 168:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
We used to travel with the Prophet and neither did the fasting persons
criticize those who were not fasting, nor did those who were not fasting
criticize the fasting ones.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 169:
Narrated Tawus:
Ibn 'Abbas said, "Allah's Apostle set out from Medina to Mecca and he
fasted till he reached 'Usfan, where he asked for water and raised his hand
to let the people see him, and then broke the fast, and did not fast after that
till he reached Mecca, and that happened in Ramadan." Ibn 'Abbas used to
say, "Allah's Apostle (sometimes) fasted and (sometimes) did not fast
during the journeys so whoever wished to fast could fast, and whoever
wished not to fast, could do so."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 170:
Narrated Nafi:
Ibn 'Umar recited the verse: "They had a choice either to fast or to feed a
poor person for every day, and said that the order of this Verse was
cancelled.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 171:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Sometimes I missed some days of Ramadan, but could not fast in lieu of
them except in the month of Sha'ban." Said Yahya, a sub-narrator, "She
used to be busy serving the Prophet ."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 172:
Narrated Abu Said:
The Prophet said, "Isn't it true that a woman does not pray and does not
fast on menstruating? And that is the defect (a loss) in her religion."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 173:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever died and he ought to have fasted (the missed
days of Ramadan) then his guardians must fast on his behalf."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 174:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
A man came to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! My mother died
and she ought to have fasted one month (for her missed Ramadan). Shall I
fast on her behalf?" The Prophet replied in the affirmative and said, "Allah's
debts have more right to be paid." In another narration a woman is reported
to have said, "My sister died..."
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: A woman said to the Prophet "My mother died and she
had vowed to fast but she didn't fast." In another narration Ibn 'Abbas is
reported to have said, "A woman said to the Prophet, "My mother died
while she ought to have fasted for fifteen days."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 175:
Narrated Umar bin Al-Khattab:
Allah's Apostle said, "When night falls from this side and the day vanishes
from this side and the sun sets, then the fasting person should break his
fast."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 176:
Narrated Abdullah bin Abi Aufa:
We were in the company of the Prophet on a journey and he was fasting,
and when the sun set, he addressed somebody, "O so-and-so, get up and
mix Sawiq with water for us." He replied, "O Allah's Apostle! (Will you wait)
till it is evening?" The Prophet said, "Get down and mix Sawiq with water for
us." He replied, "O Allah's Apostle! (If you wait) till it is evening." The
Prophet said again, "Get down and mix Sawiq with water for us." He replied,
"It is still daytime."(1) The Prophet said again, "Get down and mix Sawiq
with water for us." He got down and mixed Sawiq for them. The Prophet
drank it and then said, "When you see night falling from this side, the fasting
person should break his fast."
Volume 3, Book 31, Number 177:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa"
We were traveling with Allah's Apostle and he was fasting, and when the
sun set, he said to (someone), "Get down and mix Sawiq with water for us."
He replied, "O Allah's Apostle! (Will you wait) till it is evening?" The Prophet
again said, "Get down and mix Sawiq with water for us." He replied, "O
Allah's Apostle! It is still daytime." The Prophet said again, "Get down and
mix Sawiq with water for us." So, he got down and carried out that order.
The Prophet then said, "When you see night falling from this side, the
fasting person should break his fast," and he beckoned with his finger
towards the east.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 178:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
Allah's Apostle said, "The people will remain on the right path as long as
they hasten the breaking of the fast."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 179:
Narrated Ibn Abi Aufa:
I was with the Prophet on a journey, and he observed the fast till evening.
The Prophet said to a man, "Get down and mix Sawiq with water for me."
He replied, "Will you wait till it is evening?" The Prophet said, "Get down and
mix Sawiq with water for me; when you see night falling from this side, the
fasting person should break his fast."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 180:
Narrated Abu Usama from Hisham bin 'Ursa from Fatima:
Asma bint Abi Bakr said, "We broke our fast during the lifetime of the
Prophet on a cloudy day and then the sun appeared." Hisham was asked,
"Were they ordered to fast in lieu of that day?" He replied, "It had to be
made up for." Ma'mar said, "I heard Hisham saying, "I don't know whether
they fasted in lieu of that day or not."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 181:
Narrated Ar-Rubi' bint Mu'awadh:
"The Prophet sent a messenger to the village of the Ansar in the morning of
the day of 'Ashura' (10th of Muharram) to announce: 'Whoever has eaten
something should not eat but complete the fast, and whoever is observing
the fast should complete it.' "She further said, "Since then we used to fast
on that day regularly and also make our boys fast. We used to make toys of
wool for the boys and if anyone of them cried for, he was given those toys
till it was the time of the breaking of the fast."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 182:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "Do not practice Al-Wisal (fasting continuously without
breaking one's fast in the evening or eating before the following dawn)."
The people said to the Prophet, "But you practice Al-Wisal?" The Prophet
replied, "I am not like any of you, for I am given food and drink (by Allah)
during the night."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 183:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
Allah's Apostle forbade Al-Wisal. The people said (to him), "But you practice
it?" He said, "I am not like you, for I am given food and drink by Allah."
Volume 3, Book 31, Number 184:
'Narrated Abu Sa'id:
That he had heard the Prophet saying, "Do not fast continuously (practise
Al-Wisal), and if you intend to lengthen your fast, then carry it on only till the
Suhur (before the following dawn)." The people said to him, "But you
practice (Al-Wisal), O Allah's Apostle!" He replied, "I am not similar to you,
for during my sleep I have One Who makes me eat and drink."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 185:
Narrated Aisha:
Allah's Apostle forbade Al-Wisal out of mercy to them. They said to him,
"But you practice Al-Wisal?" He said, "I am not similar to you, for my Lord
gives me food and drink. "

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 186:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle forbade Al-Wisal in fasting. So, one of the Muslims said to
him, "But you practice Al-Wisal. O Allah's Apostle!" The Prophet replied,
"Who amongst you is similar to me? I am given food and drink during my
sleep by my Lord." So, when the people refused to stop Al-Wisal (fasting
continuously), the Prophet fasted day and night continuously along with
them for a day and then another day and then they saw the crescent moon
(of the month of Shawwal). The Prophet said to them (angrily), "If It (the
crescent) had not appeared, I would have made you fast for a longer
period." That was as a punishment for them when they refused to stop
(practising Al-Wisal).

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 187:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said twice, "(O you people) Be cautious! Do not practice AlWisal." The people said to him, "But you practice Al-Wisal?" The Prophet
replied, "My Lord gives me food and drink during my sleep. Do that much of
deeds which is within your ability."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 188:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle said, "Do not fast continuously day and night (practise AlWisal) and if anyone of you intends to fast continuously day and night, he
should continue till the Suhur time." They said, "But you practise Al-Wisal, O
Allah's Apostle!" The Prophet said, "I am not similar to you;. during my sleep
I have One Who makes me eat and drink."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 189:
Narrated Abu Juhaifa:
The Prophet made a bond of brotherhood between Salman and Abu AdDarda.' Salman paid a visit to Abu Ad-Darda' and found Um Ad-Darda'
dressed in shabby clothes and asked her why she was in that state. She
replied, "Your brother Abu Ad-Darda' is not interested in (the luxuries of)
this world." In the meantime Abu Ad-Darda' came and prepared a meal for
Salman. Salman requested Abu Ad-Darda' to eat (with him), but Abu AdDarda' said, "I am fasting." Salman said, "I am not going to eat unless you
eat." So, Abu Ad-Darda' ate(with Salman). When it was night and (a part of
the night passed), Abu Ad-Darda' got up (to offer the night prayer), but
Salman told him to sleep and Abu Ad-Darda' slept. After sometime Abu AdDarda' again got up but Salman told him to sleep. When it was the last hours
of the night, Salman told him to get up then, and both of them offered the
prayer. Salman told Abu Ad-Darda', "Your Lord has a right on you, your soul
has a right on you, and your family has a right on you; so you should give the
rights of all those who has a right on you." Abu Ad-Darda' came to the
Prophet and narrated the whole story. The Prophet said, "Salman has
spoken the truth."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 190:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle used to fast till one would say that he would never stop
fasting, and he would abandon fasting till one would say that he would
never fast. I never saw Allah's Apostle fasting for a whole month except the
month of Ramadan, and did not see him fasting in any month more than in
the month of Sha'ban.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 191:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet never fasted in any month more than in the month of Sha'ban.
He used to say, "Do those deeds which you can do easily, as Allah will not
get tired (of giving rewards) till you get bored and tired (of performing
religious deeds)." The most beloved prayer to the Prophet was the one that
was done regularly (throughout the life) even if it were little. And whenever
the Prophet offered a prayer he used to offer it regularly .

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 192:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet never fasted a full month except the month of Ramadan, and
he used to fast till one could say, "By Allah, he will never stop fasting," and
he would abandon fasting till one would say, "By Allah, he will never fast."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 193:
Narrated Anas
Allah's Apostle used to leave fasting in a certain month till we thought that
he would not fast in that month, and he used to fast in another month till
we thought he would not stop fasting at all in that month. And if one
wanted to see him praying at night, one could see him (in that condition),
and if one wanted to see him sleeping at night, one could see him (in that
condition) too.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 194:
Narrated Humaid:
I asked Anas about the fasting of the Prophet. He said "Whenever I liked to
see the Prophet fasting in any month, I could see that, and whenever I liked
to see him not fasting, I could see that too, and if I liked to see him praying
in any night, I could see that, and if I liked to see him sleeping, I could see
that, too." Anas further said, "I never touched silk or velvet softer than the
hand of Allah's Apostle and never smelled musk or perfumed smoke more
pleasant than the smell of Allah's Apostle."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 195:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As:
"Once Allah's Apostle came to me," and then he narrated the whole
narration, i.e. your guest has a right on you, and your wife has a right on you.
I then asked about the fasting of David. The Prophet replied, "Half of the
year," (i.e. he used to fast on every alternate day).

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 196:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As:
Allah's Apostle said to me, "O 'Abdullah! Have I not been informed that you
fast during the day and offer prayers all the night." 'Abdullah replied, "Yes,
O Allah's Apostle!" The Prophet said, "Don't do that; fast for few days and
then give it up for few days, offer prayers and also sleep at night, as your
body has a right on you, and your wife has a right on you, and your guest has
a right on you. And it is sufficient for you to fast three days in a month, as
the reward of a good deed is multiplied ten times, so it will be like fasting
throughout the year." I insisted (on fasting) and so I was given a hard
instruction. I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have power." The Prophet said, "Fast
like the fasting of the Prophet David and do not fast more than that." I said,
"How was the fasting of the Prophet of Allah, David?" He said, "Half of the
year," (i.e. he used to fast on every alternate day).
Afterwards when 'Abdullah became old, he used to say, "It would have been
better for me if I had accepted the permission of the Prophet (which he
gave me i.e. to fast only three days a month)."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 197:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
Allah's Apostle was informed that I had taken an oath to fast daily and to
pray (every night) all the night throughout my life (so Allah's Apostle came
to me and asked whether it was correct): I replied, "Let my parents be
sacrificed for you! I said so." The Prophet said, "You can not do that. So, fast
for few days and give it up for few days, r ray and sleep. Fast three days a
month as the reward of good deeds is multiplied ten times and that will be
equal to one year of fasting." I replied, "I can do better than that." The
Prophet said to me, "Fast one day and give up fasting for a day and that is
the fasting of Prophet David and that is the best fasting." I said, "I have the
power to fast better (more) than that." The Prophet said, "There is no
better fasting than that."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 198:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
The news of my daily fasting and praying every night throughout the night
reached the Prophet. So he sent for me or I met him, and he said, "I have
been informed that you fast everyday and pray every night (all the night).
Fast (for some days) and give up fasting (for some days); pray and sleep, for
your eyes have a right on you, and your body and your family (i.e. wife) have
a right on you." I replied, "I have more power than that (fasting)." The
Prophet said, "Then fast like the fasts of (the Prophet) David". I said, "How?"
He replied, "He used to fast on alternate days, and he used not to flee on
meeting the enemy." I said, "From where can I get that chance?" ('Ata' said,
"I do not know how the expression of fasting daily throughout the life
occurred.") So, the Prophet said, twice, "Whoever fasts daily throughout his
life is just as the one who does not fast at all."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 199:
Narrated Mujahid from 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
The Prophet said (to 'Abdullah), "Fast three days a month." 'Abdullah said,
(to the Prophet) "I am able to fast more than that." They kept on arguing on
this matter till the Prophet said, "Fast on alternate days, and recite the
whole Qur'an once a month." 'Abdullah said, "I can recite more (in a
month)," and the argument went on till the Prophet said, "Recite the Qur'an
once each three days." (i.e. you must not recite the whole Qur'an in less
than three days).

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 200:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As:
The Prophet said to me, "You fast daily all the year and pray every night all
the night?" I replied in the affirmative. The Prophet said, "If you keep on
doing this, your eyes will become weak and your body will get tired. He who
fasts all the year is as he who did not fast at all. The fasting of three days (a
month) will be equal to the tasting of the whole year." I replied, "I have the
power for more than this." The Prophet said, "Then fast like the fasting of
David who used to fast on alternate days and would never flee from the
battle field, on meeting the enemy.
Volume 3, Book 31, Number 201:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
Allah's Apostle was informed about my fasts, and he came to me and I
spread for him a leather cushion stuffed with palm fires, but he sat on the
ground and the cushion remained between me and him, and then he said,
"Isn't it sufficient for you to fast three days a month?" I replied, "O Allah's
Apostle! (I can fast more)." He said, "Five?" I replied, "O Allah's Apostle! (I
can fast more)." He said, "Seven?" I replied, "O Allah's Apostle! (I can fast
more)." He said, "Nine (days per month)?" I replied, "O Allah's Apostle! (I
can fast more)" He said, "Eleven (days per month)?" And then the Prophet
said, "There is no fast superior to that of the Prophet David it was for half of
the year. So, fast on alternate days."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 202:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
My friend (the Prophet ) advised me to observe three things:
(1) to fast three days a month;
(2) to pray two Rakat of Duha prayer (fore-noon prayer); and
(3) to pray Witr before sleeping.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 203:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet paid a visit to Um-Sulaim and she placed before him dates and
ghee. The Prophet said, "Replace the ghee and dates in their respective
containers for I am fasting." Then he stood somewhere in her house and
offered an optional prayer and then he invoked good on Um-Sulaim and her
family. Then Um-Sulaim said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have a special request
(today)." He said, "What is it?" She replied, "(Please invoke for) your servant
Anas." So Allah's Apostle did not leave anything good in the world or the
Hereafter which he did not invoke (Allah to bestow) on me and said, "O
Allah! Give him (i.e. Anas) property and children and bless him." Thus I am
one of the richest among the Ansar and my daughter Umaina told me that
when A-Hajjaj came to Basra, more than 120 of my offspring had been
buried.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 204:
Narrated Mutarrif from 'Imran Ibn Husain:
That the Prophet asked him (Imran) or asked a man and Imran was listening,
"O Abu so-and-so! Have you fasted the last days of this month?" (The
narrator thought that he said, "the month of Ramadan"). The man replied,
"No, O Allah's Apostle!" The Prophet said to him, "When you finish your
fasting (of Ramadan) fast two days (in Shawwal)." Through another series
of narrators 'Imran said, "The Prophet said, '(Have you fasted) the last days
of Sha'ban?"

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 205:
Narrated Muhammad bin 'Abbas:
I asked Jabir "Did the Prophet forbid fasting on Fridays?" He replied, "Yes."
(Other narrators added, "If he intends to fast only that day.")

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 206:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard the Prophet saying, "None of you should fast on Friday unless he
fasts a day before or after it."
Volume 3, Book 31, Number 207:
Narrated Abu Aiyub from Juwairiya bint Al-Harith:
The Prophet visited her (Juwairiya) on a Friday and she was fasting. He
asked her, "Did you fast yesterday?" She said, "No." He said, "Do you intend
to fast tomorrow?" She said, "No." He said, "Then break your fast." Through
another series of narrators, Abu Aiyub is reported to have said, "He ordered
her and she broke her fast."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 208:
Narrated Alqama:
I asked 'Aisha "Did Allah s Apostle, use to choose some special days (for
fasting)?" She replied, "No, but he used to be regular (constant) (in his
service of worshipping). Who amongst you can endure what Allah's Apostle
used to endure?"

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 209:
Narrated Um Al-Fadl bint Al-Harith:
"While the people were with me on the day of 'Arafat they differed as to
whether the Prophet was fasting or not; some said that he was fasting while
others said that he was not fasting. So, I sent to him a bowl full of milk while
he was riding over his camel and he drank it."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 210:
Narrated Maimuna:
The people doubted whether the Prophet was fasting on the day of 'Arafat
or not, so I sent milk while he was standing at 'Arafat, he drank it and the
people were looking at him.
Volume 3, Book 31, Number 211:
Narrated Abu 'Ubaid:
(the slave of Ibn Azhar) I witnessed the 'Id with 'Umar bin Al-Kattab who
said, Allah's Apostle has forbidden people to fast on the day on which you
break fasting (the fasts of Ramadan) and the day on which you eat the meat
of your sacrifices (the first day of 'Id ul Fitr and 'Id ul-Adha).

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 212:
Narrated Abu Sa'id:
The Prophet forbade the fasting of 'Id-ul-Fitr and 'Id-ul-Adha (two feast
days) and also the wearing of As-Samma' (a single garment covering the
whole body), and sitting with one's leg drawn up while being wrapped in
one garment. He also forbade the prayers after the Fajr (morning) and the
'Asr (afternoon) prayers.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 213:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Two fasts and two kinds of sale are forbidden: fasting on the day of 'Id ul
Fitr and 'Id-ul-Adha and the kinds of sale called Mulamasa and Munabadha.
(These two kinds of sale used to be practiced in the days of Pre-lslamic
period of ignorance; Mulamasa means when you touch something displayed
for sale you have to buy it; Munabadha means when the seller throws
something to you, you have to buy it.)

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 214:
Narrated Ziyad bin Jubair:
A man went to Ibn 'Umar I. and said, "A man vowed to fast one day (the subnarrator thinks that he said that the day was Monday), and that day
happened to be 'Id day." Ibn 'Umar said, "Allah orders vows to be fulfilled
and the Prophet forbade the fasting on this day (i.e. Id)."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 215:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
(who fought in twelve Ghazawat in the company of the Prophet). I heard
four things from the Prophet and they won my admiration. He said;
1. "No lady should travel on a journey of two days except with her husband
or a Dhi-Mahram;
2. "No fasting is permissible on the two days of Id-ul-Fitr and 'Id-ul-Adha;
3. "No prayer (may be offered) after the morning compulsory prayer until
the sun rises; and no prayer after the 'Asr prayer till the sun sets;
4. "One should travel only for visiting three Masajid (Mosques): Masjid-ulHaram (Mecca), Masjid-ul-Aqsa (Jerusalem), and this (my) Mosque (at
Medina)."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 216:
Narrated 'Aisha and Ibn 'Umar:
Nobody was allowed to fast on the days of Tashrlq except those who could
not afford the Hadi (Sacrifice).

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 217:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Fasting for those who perform ,Hajj-at-Tamattu' (in lieu of the Hadi which
they cannot afford) may be performed up to the day of 'Arafat. And if one
does not get a Hadi and has not fasted (before the 'Id) then one should fast
of the days of Mina. (11, 12 and 13th of Dhul Hajja).
Volume 3, Book 31, Number 218:
Narrated Salim's father:
The Prophet said, "Whoever wishes may fast on the day of 'Ashura'."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 219:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle ordered (the Muslims) to fast on the day of 'Ashura', and
when fasting in the month of Ramadan was prescribed, it became optional
for one to fast on that day ('Ashura') or not.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 220:
Narrated Aisha:
Quraish used to fast on the day of 'Ashura' in the Pre-lslamic period, and
Allah's Apostle too, used to fast on that day. When he came to Medina, he
fasted on that day and ordered others to fast, too. Later when the fasting of
the month of Ramadan was prescribed, he gave up fasting on the day of
'Ashura' and it became optional for one to fast on it or not.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 221:
Narrated Humaid bin 'Abdur Rahman:
That he heard Muawiya bin Abi Sufyan on the day of 'Ashura' during the year
he performed the Hajj, saying on the pulpit, "O the people of Medina! Where
are your Religious Scholars? I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'This is the day of
'Ashura'. Allah has not enjoined its fasting on you but I am fasting it. You
have the choice either to fast or not to fast (on this day).' "
Volume 3, Book 31, Number 222:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet came to Medina and saw the Jews fasting on the day of Ashura.
He asked them about that. They replied, "This is a good day, the day on
which Allah rescued Bani Israel from their enemy. So, Moses fasted this
day." The Prophet said, "We have more claim over Moses than you." So, the
Prophet fasted on that day and ordered (the Muslims) to fast (on that day).

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 223:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The day of 'Ashura' was considered as 'Id day by the Jews. So the Prophet
ordered, "I recommend you (Muslims) to fast on this day."

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 224:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
I never saw the Prophet seeking to fast on a day more (preferable to him)
than this day, the day of 'Ashura', or this month, i.e. the month of Ramadan.

Volume 3, Book 31, Number 225:
Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa:
The Prophet ordered a man from the tribe of Bani Aslam to announce
amongst the people that whoever had eaten should fast the rest of the day,
and whoever had not eaten should continue his fast, as that day was the day
of 'Ashura' .
BOOK 32. PRAYING AT NIGHT IN RAMADAAN (TARAWEEH) (226-241)
Volume 3, Book 32, Number 226:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying regarding Ramadan, "Whoever prayed at night
in it (the month of Ramadan) out of sincere Faith and hoping for a reward
from Allah, then all his previous sins will be forgiven."

Volume 3, Book 32, Number 227:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever prayed at night the whole month of
Ramadan out of sincere Faith and hoping for a reward from Allah, then all
his previous sins will be forgiven." Ibn Shihab (a sub-narrator) said, "Allah's
Apostle died and the people continued observing that (i.e. Nawafil offered
individually, not in congregation), and it remained as it was during the
Caliphate of Abu Bakr and in the early days of 'Umar's Caliphate." 'Abdur
Rahman bin 'Abdul Qari said, "I went out in the company of 'Umar bin AlKhattab one night in Ramadan to the mosque and found the people praying
in different groups. A man praying alone or a man praying with a little group
behind him. So, 'Umar said, 'In my opinion I would better collect these
(people) under the leadership of one Qari (Reciter) (i.e. let them pray in
congregation!)'. So, he made up his mind to congregate them behind Ubai
bin Ka'b. Then on another night I went again in his company and the people
were praying behind their reciter. On that, 'Umar remarked, 'What an
excellent Bid'a (i.e. innovation in religion) this is; but the prayer which they
do not perform, but sleep at its time is better than the one they are
offering.' He meant the prayer in the last part of the night. (In those days)
people used to pray in the early part of the night."
Volume 3, Book 32, Number 228:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle used to pray (at night) in Ramadan.

Volume 3, Book 32, Number 229:
Narrated 'Urwa:
That he was informed by 'Aisha, "Allah's Apostle went out in the middle of
the night and prayed in the mosque and some men prayed behind him. In
the morning, the people spoke about it and then a large number of them
gathered and prayed behind him (on the second night). In the next morning
the people again talked about it and on the third night the mosque was full
with a large number of people. Allah's Apostle came out and the people
prayed behind him. On the fourth night the Mosque was overwhelmed with
people and could not accommodate them, but the Prophet came out (only)
for the morning prayer. When the morning prayer was finished he recited
Tashah-hud and (addressing the people) said, "Amma ba'du, your presence
was not hidden from me but I was afraid lest the night prayer (Qiyam)
should be enjoined on you and you might not be able to carry it on." So,
Allah's Apostle died and the situation remained like that (i.e. people prayed
individually). "

Volume 3, Book 32, Number 230:
Narrated Abu Salama bin 'Abdur Rahman:
that he asked 'Aisha "How was the prayer of Allah's Apostle in Ramadan?"
She replied, "He did not pray more than eleven Rakat in Ramadan or in any
other month. He used to pray four Rakat ---- let alone their beauty and
length----and then he would pray four ----let alone their beauty and length ---and then he would pray three Rakat (Witr)." She added, "I asked, 'O Allah's
Apostle! Do you sleep before praying the Witr?' He replied, 'O 'Aisha! My
eyes sleep but my heart does not sleep."
Volume 3, Book 32, Number 231:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Whoever fasted the month of Ramadan out of sincere
Faith (i.e. belief) and hoping for a reward from Allah, then all his past sins
will be forgiven, and whoever stood for the prayers in the night of Qadr out
of sincere Faith and hoping for a reward from Allah, then all his previous sins
will be forgiven ."

Volume 3, Book 32, Number 232:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Some men amongst the companions of the Prophet were shown in their
dreams that the night of Qadr was in the last seven nights of Ramadan.
Allah's Apostle said, "It seems that all your dreams agree that (the Night of
Qadr) is in the last seven nights, and whoever wants to search for it (i.e. the
Night of Qadr) should search in the last seven (nights of Ramadan)."

Volume 3, Book 32, Number 233:
Narrated Abu Salama:
I asked Abu Sa'id, and he was a friend of mine, (about the Night of Qadr)
and he said, "We practiced Itikaf (seclusion in the mosque) in the middle
third of the month of Ramadan with the Prophet . In the morning of the
20th of Ramadan, the Prophet came and addressed us and said, 'I was
informed of (the date of the Night of Qadr) but I was caused to forget it; so
search for it in the odd nights of the last ten nights of the month of
Ramadan. (In the dream) I saw myself prostrating in mud and water (as a
sign). So, whoever was in l'tikaf with me should return to it with me (for
another 10-day's period)', and we returned. At that time there was no sign
of clouds in the sky but suddenly a cloud came and it rained till rain-water
started leaking through the roof of the mosque which was made of date-
palm leaf stalks. Then the prayer was established and I saw Allah's Apostle
prostrating in mud and water and I saw the traces of mud on his forehead."

Volume 3, Book 32, Number 234:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said, "Search for the Night of Qadr in the odd nights of the
last ten days of Ramadan."

Volume 3, Book 32, Number 235:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle used to practice Itikaf (in the mosque) in the middle third of
Ramadan and after passing the twenty nights he used to go back to his
house on the 21st, and the people who were in Itikaf with him also used to
go back to their houses. Once in Ramadan, in which he practiced Itikaf, he
established the night prayers at the night in which he used to return home,
and then he addressed the people and ordered them whatever Allah wished
him to order and said, "I used to practice Itikaf for these ten days (i.e. the
middle 113rd but now I intend to stay in Itikaf for the last ten days (of the
month); so whoever was in Itikaf with me should stay at his place of
seclusion. I have verily been shown (the date of) this Night (of Qadr) but I
have forgotten it. So search for it in the odd nights of the last ten days (of
this month). I also saw myself (in the dream) prostrating in mud and water."
On the night of the 21st, the sky was covered with clouds and it rained, and
the rain-water started leaking through the roof of the mosque at the praying
place of the Prophet . I saw with my own eyes the Prophet at the
completion of the morning prayer leaving with his face covered with mud
and water.

Volume 3, Book 32, Number 236:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "Look for (the Night of Qadr)."

Volume 3, Book 32, Number 237:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle used to practice Itikaf in the last ten nights of Ramadan and
used to say, "Look for the Night of Qadr in the last ten nights of the month
of Ramadan ,"

Volume 3, Book 32, Number 238:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet said, "Look for the Night of Qadr in the last ten nights of
Ramadan ,' on the night when nine or seven or five nights remain out of the
last ten nights of Ramadan (i.e. 21, 23, 25, respectively)."

Volume 3, Book 32, Number 239:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle said, "The Night of Qadr is in the last ten nights of the month
(Ramadan), either on the first nine or in the last (remaining) seven nights (of
Ramadan)." Ibn 'Abbas added, "Search for it on the twenty-fourth (of
Ramadan)."

Volume 3, Book 32, Number 240:
Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit:
The Prophet came out to inform us about the Night of Qadr but two
Muslims were quarreling with each other. So, the Prophet said, "I came out
to inform you about the Night of Qadr but such-and-such persons were
quarreling, so the news about it had been taken away; yet that might be for
your own good, so search for it on the 29th, 27th and 25th (of Ramadan).

Volume 3, Book 32, Number 241:
Narrated Aisha:
With the start of the last ten days of Ramadan, the Prophet used to tighten
his waist belt (i.e. work hard) and used to pray all the night, and used to
keep his family awake for the prayers.
BOOK 33. RETIRING TO A MOSQUE FOR REMEMBRANCE OF ALLAH (I'TIKAF) (242-262)
Volume 3, Book 33, Number 242:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
Allah's Apostle used to practise Itikaf in the last ten days of the month of
Ramadan.

Volume 3, Book 33, Number 243:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) The Prophet used to practice Itikaf in the last ten
days of Ramadan till he died and then his wives used to practice Itikaf after
him.

Volume 3, Book 33, Number 244:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle used to practice Itikaf in the middle ten days of Ramadan and
once he stayed in Itikaf till the night of the twenty-first and it was the night
in the morning of which he used to come out of his Itikaf. The Prophet said,
"Whoever was in Itikaf with me should stay in Itikaf for the last ten days, for
I was informed (of the date) of the Night (of Qadr) but I have been caused
to forget it. (In the dream) I saw myself prostrating in mud and water in the
morning of that night. So, look for it in the last ten nights and in the odd
ones of them." It rained that night and the roof of the mosque dribbled as it
was made of leaf stalks of date-palms. I saw with my own eyes the mark of
mud and water on the forehead of the Prophet (i.e. in the morning of the
twenty-first).
Volume 3, Book 33, Number 245:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to (put) bend his head (out) to me while he was in Itikaf in
the mosque during my monthly periods and I would comb and oil his hair.

Volume 3, Book 33, Number 246:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle used to let his head in (the house)
while he was in the mosque and I would comb and oil his hair. When in Itikaf
he used not to enter the house except for a need.

Volume 3, Book 33, Number 247:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to embrace me during my menses. He also used to put his
head out of the mosque while he was in Itikaf, and I would wash it during my
menses.

Volume 3, Book 33, Number 248:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Umar asked the Prophet "I vowed in the Pre-lslamic period of ignorance to
stay in Itikaf for one night in Al-Masjid al-Haram." The Prophet said to him,
"Fulfill your vow."

Volume 3, Book 33, Number 249:
Narrated 'Amra:
Aisha said, "the Prophet used to practice Itikaf in the last ten days of
Ramadan and I used to pitch a tent for him, and after offering the morning
prayer, he used to enter the tent." Hafsa asked the permission of 'Aisha to
pitch a tent for her and she allowed her and she pitched her tent. When
Zainab bint Jahsh saw it, she pitched another tent. In the morning the
Prophet noticed the tents. He said, 'What is this?" He was told of the whole
situation. Then the Prophet said, "Do you think that they intended to do
righteousness by doing this?" He therefore abandoned the Itikaf in that
month and practiced Itikaf for ten days in the month of Shawwal."

Volume 3, Book 33, Number 250:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet intended to practice Itikaf and when he reached the place
where he intended to perform Itikaf, he saw some tents, the tents of 'Aisha,
Hafsa and Zainab. So, he said, "Do you consider that they intended to do
righteousness by doing this?" And then he went away and did not perform
Itikaf (in Ramadan) but performed it in the month of Shawwal for ten days.

Volume 3, Book 33, Number 251:
Narrated Ali bin Al-Husain:
Safiya, the wife of the Prophet told me that she went to Allah's Apostle to
visit him in the mosque while he was in Itikaf in the last ten days of
Ramadan. She had a talk with him for a while, then she got up in order to
return home. The Prophet accompanied her. When they reached the gate of
the mosque, opposite the door of Um-Salama, two Ansari men were passing
by and they greeted Allah's Apostle . He told them: Do not run away! And
said, "She is (my wife) Safiya bint Huyai." Both of them said, "Subhan Allah,
(How dare we think of any evil) O Allah's Apostle!" And they felt it. The
Prophet said (to them), "Satan reaches everywhere in the human body as
blood reaches in it, (everywhere in one's body). I was afraid lest Satan might
insert an evil thought in your minds."
Volume 3, Book 33, Number 252:
Narrated Abu Salama bin 'Abdur-Rahman:
I asked Abu Said Al-Khudri, "Did you hear Allah's Apostle talking about the
Night of Qadr?" He replied in the affirmative and said, "Once we were in
Itikaf with Allah's Apostle in the middle ten days of (Ramadan) and we came
out of it in the morning of the twentieth, and Allah's Apostle- delivered a
sermon on the 20th (of Ramadan) and said, 'I was informed (of the date) of
the Night of Qadr (in my dream) but had forgotten it. So, look for it in the
odd nights of the last ten nights of the month of Ramadan. I saw myself
prostrating in mud and water on that night (as a sign of the Night of Qadr).
So, whoever had been in Itikaf with Allah's Apostle should return for it.' The
people returned to the mosque (for Itikaf). There was no trace of clouds in
the sky. But all of a sudden a cloud came and it rained. Then the prayer was
established (they stood for the prayer) and Allah's Apostle prostrated in
mud and water and I saw mud over the forehead and the nose of the
Prophet.

Volume 3, Book 33, Number 253:
Narrated 'Aisha:
One of the wives of Allah's Apostle practiced Itikaf with him while she ad
bleeding in between her periods and she would see red (blood) or yellowish
traces, and sometimes we put a tray beneath her when she offered the
prayer.

Volume 3, Book 33, Number 254:
Narrated 'Ali bin Al-Husain (from Safiya, the Prophet's wife):
The wives of the Prophet were with him in the mosque (while he was in
Itikaf) and then they departed and the Prophet said to Safiya bint Huyai,
"Don't hurry up, for I shall accompany you," (and her dwelling was in the
house of Usama). The Prophet went out and in the meantime two Ansari
men met him and they looked at the Prophet and passed by. The Prophet
said to them, "Come here. She is (my wife) Safiya bint Huyai." They replied,
"Subhan Allah, (How dare we think of evil) O Allah's Apostle! (we never
expect anything bad from you)." The Prophet replied, "Satan circulates in
the human being as blood circulates in the body, and I was afraid lest Satan
might insert an evil thought in your minds."

Volume 3, Book 33, Number 255:
Narrated 'Ali bin Al-Husain from Safiya:
Safiya went to the Prophet while he was in Itikaf. When she returned, the
Prophet accompanied her walking. An Ansari man saw him. When the
Prophet noticed him, he called him and said, "Come here. She is Safiya.
(Sufyan a sub-narrator perhaps said that the Prophet had said, "This is
Safiya"). And Satan circulates in the body of Adam's offspring as his blood
circulates in it."
(A sub-narrator asked Sufyan, "Did Safiya visit him at night?" He said, "Of
course, at night.")

Volume 3, Book 33, Number 256:
Narrated Abu Said:
We practiced Itikaf with Allah's Apostle in the middle ten days (of
Ramadan). In the morning of the twentieth (of Ramadan) we shifted our
baggage, but Allah's Apostle came to us and said, "Whoever was m Itikaf
should return to his place of Itikaf, for I saw (i.e. was informed about the
date of) this Night (of Qadr) and saw myself prostrating in mud and water."
When I returned to my place the sky was overcast with clouds and it rained.
By Him Who sent Muhammad with the Truth, the sky was covered with
clouds from the end of that day, and the mosque which was roofed with
leaf-stalks of date palm trees (leaked with rain) and I saw the trace of mud
and water over the nose of the Prophet and its tip.
Volume 3, Book 33, Number 257:
Narrated 'Amra bint 'Abdur-Rahman from 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle used to practice Itikaf every year in the month of Ramadan.
And after offering the morning prayer, he used to enter the place of his
Itikaf. 'Aisha asked his permission to let her practice Itikaf and he allowed
her, and so she pitched a tent in the mosque. When Hafsa heard of that, she
also pitched a tent (for herself), and when Zainab heard of that, she too
pitched another tent. When, in the morning, Allah's Apostle had finished the
morning prayer, he saw four tents and asked, "What is this?" He was
informed about it. He then said, "What made them do this? Is it
righteousness? Remove the tents, for I do not want to see them." So, the
tents were removed. The Prophet did not perform Itikaf that year in the
month of Ramadan, but did it in the last ten days of Shawwal.

Volume 3, Book 33, Number 258:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
'Umar bin Al-Khattab said, "O Allah's Apostle! I vowed in the Pre-lslamic
period to perform Itikaf in Al-Masjid-al-Haram for one night." The Prophet
said, "Fulfill your vow." So, he performed Itikaf for one night.

Volume 3, Book 33, Number 259:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
that 'Umar had vowed in the Pre-lslamic period to perform Itikaf in AlMasjid-al-Haram. (A sub-narrator thinks that 'Umar vowed to perform Itikaf
for one night.) Allah's Apostle said to 'Umar, "Fulfill your vow."

Volume 3, Book 33, Number 260:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet used to perform Itikaf every year in the month of Ramadan for
ten days, and when it was the year of his death, he stayed in Itikaf for
twenty days.

Volume 3, Book 33, Number 261:
Narrated 'Amra bint 'AbdurRahman from 'Aisha: Allah's Apostle mentioned
that he would practice Itikaf in the last ten days of Ramadan. 'Aisha asked
his permission to perform Itikaf and he permitted her. Hafsa asked 'Aisha to
take his permission for

Volume 3, Book 33, Number 262:
Narrated 'Urwa:
Aisha during her menses used to comb and oil the hair of the Prophet while
he used to be in Itikaf in the mosque. He would stretch out his head towards
her while she was in her chamber.
BOOK 34. SALES AND TRADE (263-440)
Volume 3, Book 34, Number 263:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
You people say that Abu Huraira tells many narrations from Allah's Apostle
and you also wonder why the emigrants and Ansar do not narrate from
Allah's Apostle as Abu Huraira does. My emigrant brothers were busy in the
market while I used to stick to Allah's Apostle content with what fills my
stomach; so I used to be present when they were absent and I used to
remember when they used to forget, and my Ansari brothers used to be
busy with their properties and I was one of the poor men of Suffa. I used to
remember the narrations when they used to forget. No doubt, Allah's
Apostle once said, "Whoever spreads his garment till I have finished my
present speech and then gathers it to himself, will remember whatever I will
say." So, I spread my colored garment which I was wearing till Allah's
Apostle had finished his saying, and then I gathered it to my chest. So, I did
not forget any of that narrations.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 264:
Narrated Ibrahim bin Sad from his father from his grand-father:
Abdur Rahman bin Auf said, "When we came to Medina as emigrants, Allah's
Apostle established a bond of brotherhood between me and Sad bin ArRabi'. Sad bin Ar-Rabi' said (to me), 'I am the richest among the Ansar, so I
will give you half of my wealth and you may look at my two wives and
whichever of the two you may choose I will divorce her, and when she has
completed the prescribed period (before marriage) you may marry her.'
Abdur-Rahman replied, "I am not in need of all that. Is there any marketplace where trade is practiced?' He replied, "The market of Qainuqa." AbdurRahman went to that market the following day and brought some dried
butter-milk (yogurt) and butter, and then he continued going there
regularly. Few days later, 'AbdurRahman came having traces of yellow
(scent) on his body. Allah's Apostle asked him whether he had got married.
He replied in the affirmative. The Prophet said, 'Whom have you married?'
He replied, 'A woman from the Ansar.' Then the Prophet asked, 'How much
did you pay her?' He replied, '(I gave her) a gold piece equal in weigh to a
date stone (or a date stone of gold)! The Prophet said, 'Give a Walima
(wedding banquet) even if with one sheep .' "

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 265:
Narrated Anas:
When Abdur-Rahman bin Auf came to Medina, the Prophet established a
bond of brotherhood between him and Sad bin Ar-Rabi al-Ansari. Sad was a
rich man, so he said to 'Abdur-Rahman, "I will give you half of my property
and will help you marry." 'Abdur-Rahman said (to him), "May Allah bless you
in your family and property. Show me the market." So 'Abdur-Rahman did
not return from the market) till he gained some dried buttermilk (yoghurt)
and butter (through trading). He brought that to his house-hold. We stayed
for some-time (or as long as Allah wished), and then Abdur-Rahman came,
scented with yellowish perfume. The Prophet said (to him) "What is this?"
He replied, "I got married to an Ansari woman." The Prophet asked, "What
did you pay her?" He replied, "A gold stone or gold equal to the weight of a
date stone." The Prophet said (to him), "Give a wedding banquet even if
with one sheep."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 266:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
'Ukaz, Majanna and Dhul-Majaz were market-places in the Pre-lslamic period
of ignorance. When Islam came, Muslims felt that marketing there might be
a sin. So, the Divine Inspiration came: "There is no harm for you to seek the
bounty of your Lord (in the seasons of Hajj)." (2.198) Ibn 'Abbas recited the
Verse in this way.
Volume 3, Book 34, Number 267:
Narrated An-Nu'man bin Bashir:
The Prophet said "Both legal and illegal things are obvious, and in between
them are (suspicious) doubtful matters. So who-ever forsakes those
doubtful things lest he may commit a sin, will definitely avoid what is clearly
illegal; and who-ever indulges in these (suspicious) doubtful things bravely,
is likely to commit what is clearly illegal. Sins are Allah's Hima (i.e. private
pasture) and whoever pastures (his sheep) near it, is likely to get in it at any
moment."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 268:
Narrated Abdullah bin Abu Mulaika:
y the same woman)?" His wife was the daughter of Abu Ihab-al-Tamimi.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 269:
Narrated Aisha:
Utba bin Abu Waqqas took a firm promise from his brother Sad bin Abu
Waqqas to take the son of the slave-girl of Zam'a into his custody as he was
his (i.e. 'Utba's) son. In the year of the Conquest (of Mecca) Sad bin Abu
Waqqas took him, and said that he was his brother's son, and his brother
took a promise from him to that effect. 'Abu bin Zam'a got up and said, "He
is my brother and the son of the slave-girl of my father and was born on my
father's bed." Then they both went to the Prophet Sad said, "O Allah's
Apostle! He is the son of my brother and he has taken a promise from me
that I will take him." 'Abu bin Zam'a said, "(He is) my brother and the son of
my father's slave-girl and was born on my father's bed." Allah's Apostle said,
"The boy is for you. O 'Abu bin Zam'a." Then the Prophet said, "The son is
for the bed (i.e the man on whose bed he was born) and stones
(disappointment and deprivation) for the one who has done illegal sexual
intercourse." The Prophet told his wife Sauda bint Zam'a to screen herself
from that boy as he noticed a similarity between the boy and 'Utba. So, the
boy did not see her till he died.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 270:
Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim:
I asked Allah's Apostle about Al Mirad (i.e. a sharp-edged piece of wood or a
piece of wood provided with a piece of iron used for hunting). He replied, "If
the game is hit by its sharp edge, eat it, and if it is hit by its broad side, do
not eat it, for it has been beaten to death." I asked, "O Allah's Apostle! I
release my dog by the name of Allah and find with it at the game, another
dog on which I have not mentioned the name of Allah, and I do not know
which one of them caught the game." Allah's Apostle said (to him), 'Don't
eat it as you have mentioned the name of Allah on your dog and not on the
other dog."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 271:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet passed by a fallen date and said, "Were it not for my doubt that
this might have been given in charity, I would have eaten it." And narrated
Abu Huraira the Prophet said, "I found a date-fruit fallen on my bed."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 272:
Narrated 'Abbas bin Tamim:
that his uncle said: "The Prophet was asked: If a person feels something
during his prayer; should one interrupt his prayer?" The Prophet said: No!
You should not give it up unless you hear a sound or smell something."
Narrated Ibn Abi Hafsa: Az-Zuhri said, "There is no need of repeating
ablution unless you detect a smell or hear a sound."
Volume 3, Book 34, Number 273:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Some people said, "O Allah's Apostle! Meat is brought to us by some people
and we are not sure whether the name of Allah has been mentioned on it or
not (at the time of slaughtering the animals)." Allah's Apostle said (to
them), "Mention the name of Allah and eat it."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 274:
Narrated Jabir:
While we were offering the prayer with the Prophet a caravan carrying food
came from Sham. The people looked towards the caravan (and went to it)
and only twelve persons remained with the Prophet. So, the Divine
Inspiration came; "But when they see some bargain or some amusement,
they disperse headlong to it." (62.11)

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 275:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "A time will come when one will not care how one gains
one's money, legally or illegally."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 276:
Narrated Abu Al-Minhal:
I used to practice money exchange, and I asked Zaid bin 'Arqam about it,
and he narrated what the Prophet said in the following: Abu Al-Minhal said,
"I asked Al-Bara' bin 'Azib and Zaid bin Arqam about practicing money
exchange. They replied, 'We were traders in the time of Allah's Apostle and I
asked Allah's Apostle about money exchange. He replied, 'If it is from hand
to hand, there is no harm in it; otherwise it is not permissible."
Volume 3, Book 34, Number 277:
Narrated 'Ubai bin 'Umar:
Abu Musa asked Umar to admit him but he was not admitted as 'Umar was
busy, so Abu Musa went back. When 'Umar finished his job he said, "Didn't I
hear the voice of 'Abdullah bin Qais? Let him come in." 'Umar was told that
he had left. So, he sent for him and on his arrival, he (Abu Musa) said, "We
were ordered to do so (i.e. to leave if not admitted after asking permission
thrice). 'Umar told him, "Bring witness in proof of your statement." Abu
Musa went to the Ansar's meeting places and asked them. They said, "None
amongst us will give this witness except the youngest of us, Abu Said AlKhudri. Abu Musa then took Abu Said Al-Khudri (to 'Umar) and 'Umar said,
surprisingly, "Has this order of Allah's Apostle been hidden from me?" (Then
he added), "I used to be busy trading in markets."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 278:
Narrated Jabir:
A caravan arrived (at Medina) while we were offering the Jumua prayer with
the Prophet. The people left out for the caravan, with the exception of
twelve persons. Then this Verse was revealed: 'But when they see some
bargain or some amusement, they disperse headlong to it and leave you
standing." (62.11)

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 279:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "If a woman gives in charity from her house meals without
wasting (i.e. being extravagant), she will get the reward for her giving, and
her husband will also get the reward for his earning and the storekeeper will
also get a similar reward. The acquisition of the reward of none of them will
reduce the reward of the others."
Volume 3, Book 34, Number 280:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "If a woman gives something (i.e. in charity) from her
husband's earnings without his permission, she will get half his reward."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 281:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "whoever desires an expansion in his
sustenance and age, should keep good relations with his Kith and kin."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 282:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet purchased food grains from a Jew on credit and mortgaged his
iron armor to him.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 283:
Narrated Qatada:
Anas went to the Prophet with barley bread having some dissolved fat on it.
The Prophet had mortgaged his armor to a Jew in Medina and took from
him some barley for his family. Anas heard him saying, "The household of
Muhammad did not possess even a single Sa of wheat or food grains for the
evening meal, although he has nine wives to look after." (See Hadith No.
685)

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 284:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When Abu Bakr As-Siddiq was chosen Caliph, he said, "My people know that
my profession was not incapable of providing substance to my family. And
as I will be busy serving the Muslim nation, my family will eat from the
National Treasury of Muslims, and I will practise the profession of serving
the Muslims."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 285:
Narrated Aisha:
The companions of Allah's Apostle used to practise manual labor, so their
sweat used to smell, and they were advised to take a bath.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 286:
Narrated Al-Miqdam:
The Prophet said, "Nobody has ever eaten a better meal than that which
one has earned by working with one's own hands. The Prophet of Allah,
David used to eat from the earnings of his manual labor."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 287:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The Prophet David used not to eat except from the
earnings of his manual labor."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 288:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "One would rather cut and carry a bundle of wood on
his back than ask somebody who may or may not live him."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 289:
Narrated Az-Zubair bin Al-Awwam:
The Prophet said, "One would rather take a rope and cut wood and carry it
than ask others)."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 290:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "May Allah's mercy be on him who is lenient in his
buying, selling, and in demanding back his money."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 291:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
The Prophet said, "Before your time the angels received the soul of a man
and asked him, 'Did you do any good deeds (in your life)?' He replied, 'I used
to order my employees to grant time to the rich person to pay his debts at
his convenience.' So Allah said to the angels; "Excuse him." Rabi said that
(the dead man said), 'I used to be easy to the rich and grant time to the
poor.' Or, in another narration, 'grant time to the well-off and forgive the
needy,' or, 'accept from the well-off and forgive the needy.'

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 292:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "There was a merchant who used to lend the people, and
whenever his debtor was in straitened circumstances, he would say to his
employees, 'Forgive him so that Allah may forgive us.' So, Allah forgave
him."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 293:
Narrated Hakim bin Hizam:
Allah's Apostle said, "The seller and the buyer have the right to keep or
return goods as long as they have not parted or till they part; and if both the
parties spoke the truth and described the defects and qualities (of the
goods), then they would be blessed in their transaction, and if they told lies
or hid something, then the blessings of their transaction would be lost."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 294:
Narrated Abu Said:
We used to be given mixed dates (from the booty) and used to sell (barter)
two Sas of those dates) for one Sa (of good dates). The Prophet said (to us),
"No (bartering of) two Sas for one Sa nor two Dirhams for one Dirham is
permissible", (as that is a kind of usury). (See Hadith No. 405).

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 295:
Narrated Abu Mas'ud:
An Ansari man, called Abu Shu'aib, came and told his butcher slave,
"Prepare meals sufficient for five persons, for I want to invite the Prophet
along with four other persons as I saw signs of hunger on his face." Abu
Shu'aib invited them and another person came along with them. The
Prophet said (to Abu Shu'aib), This man followed us, so if you allow him, he
will join us, and if you want him to return, he will go back." Abu Shu'aib said,
"No, I have allowed him (i.e. he, too, is welcomed to the meal)."
Volume 3, Book 34, Number 296:
Narrated Hakim bin Hizam:
The Prophet aid, "The buyer and the seller have the option to cancel or to
confirm the deal, as long as they have not parted or till they part, and if they
spoke the truth and told each other the defects of the things, then blessings
would be in their deal, and if they hid something and told lies, the blessing of
the deal would be lost."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 297:
Narrated Aisha:
When the last Verses of Surat al- Baqara were revealed, the Prophet recited
them in the mosque and proclaimed the trade of alcohol as illegal.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 298:
Narrated Samura bin Jundab:
The Prophet said, "This night I dreamt that two men came and took me to a
Holy land whence we proceeded on till we reached a river of blood, where a
man was standing, and on its bank was standing another man with stones in
his hands. The man in the middle of the river tried to come out, but the
other threw a stone in his mouth and forced him to go back to his original
place. So, whenever he tried to come out, the other man would throw a
stone in his mouth and force him to go back to his former place. I asked,
'Who is this?' I was told, 'The person in the river was a Riba-eater."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 299:
Narrated 'Aun bin Abu Juhaifa:
My father bought a slave who practiced the profession of cupping. (My
father broke the slave's instruments of cupping). I asked my father why he
had done so. He replied, "The Prophet forbade the acceptance of the price
of a dog or blood, and also forbade the profession of tattooing, getting
tattooed and receiving or giving Riba, (usury), and cursed the picturemakers."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 300:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "The swearing (by the seller) may persuade
the buyer to purchase the goods but that will be deprived of Allah's
blessing."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 301:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Aufa:
A man displayed some goods in the market and swore by Allah that he had
been offered so much for that, that which was not offered, and he said so,
so as to cheat a Muslim. On that occasion the following Verse was revealed:
"Verily! Those who purchase a small gain at the cost of Allah's covenant and
their oaths (They shall have no portion in the Hereafter ..etc.)' (3.77)

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 302:
Narrated 'Ali:
I got an old she-camel as my share from the booty, and the Prophet had
given me another from Al-Khumus. And when I intended to marry Fatima
(daughter of the Prophet), I arranged that a goldsmith from the tribe of Bani
Qainuqa' would accompany me in order to bring Idhkhir and then sell it to
the goldsmiths and use its price for my marriage banquet.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 303:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah made Mecca a sanctuary and it was neither
permitted for anyone before, nor will it be permitted for anyone after me
(to fight in it). And fighting in it was made legal for me for a few hours of a
day only. None is allowed to uproot its thorny shrubs or to cut down its
trees or to chase its game or to pick up its Luqata (fallen things) except by a
person who would announce it publicly." 'Abbas bin 'Abdul-Muttlib
requested the Prophet, "Except Al-Idhkhir, for our goldsmiths and for the
roofs of our houses." The Prophet said, "Except Al-Idhkhir." 'Ikrima said, "Do
you know what is meant by chasing its game? It is to drive it out of the shade
and sit in its place." Khalid said, "('Abbas said: Al-Idhkhir) for our goldsmiths
and our graves."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 304:
Narrated Khabbab:
I was a blacksmith in the Pre-lslamic period, and 'Asi bin Wail owed me some
money, so I went to him to demand it. He said (to me), "I will not pay you
unless you disbelieve Muhammad." I said, "I will not disbelieve till Allah kills
you and then you get resurrected." He said, "Leave me till I die and get
resurrected, then I will be given wealth and children and I will pay you your
debt." On that occasion it was revealed to the Prophet:
'Have you seen him who disbelieved in Our signs and says: Surely I will be
given wealth and children? Has he known the unseen, or has he taken a
covenant from the Beneficent (Allah)? (19.77-78)

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 305:
Narrated Ishaq bin 'Abdullah bin Abu Talha:
I heard Anas bin Malik saying, "A tailor invited Allah's Apostle to a meal
which he had prepared. " Anas bin Malik said, "I accompanied Allah's
Apostle to that meal. He served the Prophet with bread and soup made with
gourd and dried meat. I saw the Prophet taking the pieces of gourd from the
dish." Anas added, "Since that day I have continued to like gourd."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 306:
Narrated Abu Hazim:
I heard Sahl bin Sad saying, "A woman brought a Burda (i.e. a square piece
of cloth having edging). I asked, 'Do you know what a Burda is?' They replied
in the affirmative and said, "It is a cloth sheet with woven margins." Sahl
went on, "She addressed the Prophet and said, 'I have woven it with my
hands for you to wear.' The Prophet took it as he was in need of it, and came
to us wearing it as a waist sheet. One of us said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Give it to
me to wear.' The Prophet agreed to give it to him. The Prophet sat with the
people for a while and then returned (home), wrapped that waist sheet and
sent it to him. The people said to that man, 'You haven't done well by asking
him for it when you know that he never turns down anybody's request.' The
man replied, 'By Allah, I have not asked him for it except to use it as my
shroud when I die." Sahl added; "Later it (i.e. that sheet) was his shroud."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 307:
Narrated Abu Hazim:
Some men came to Sahl bin Sad to ask him about the pulpit. He replied,
"Allah's Apostle sent for a woman (Sahl named her) (this message): 'Order
your slave carpenter to make pieces of wood (i.e. a pulpit) for me so that I
may sit on it while addressing the people.' So, she ordered him to make it
from the tamarisk of the forest. He brought it to her and she sent it to
Allah's Apostle . Allah's Apostle ordered it to be placed in the mosque: so, it
was put and he sat on it.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 308:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: An Ansari woman said to Allah's Apostle, "O
Allah's Apostle! Shall I make something for you to sit on, as I have a slave
who is a carpenter?" He replied, "If you wish." So, she got a pulpit made for
him. When it was Friday

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 309:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle bought food grains from a Jew on credit and mortgaged his
armor to him.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 310:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
I was with the Prophet in a Ghazwa (Military Expedition) and my camel was
slow and exhausted. The Prophet came up to me and said, "O Jabir." I
replied, "Yes?" He said, "What is the matter with you?" I replied, "My camel
is slow and tired, so I am left behind." So, he got down and poked the camel
with his stick and then ordered me to ride. I rode the camel and it became so
fast that I had to hold it from going ahead of Allah's Apostle . He then asked
me, have you got married?" I replied in the affirmative. He asked, "A virgin or
a matron?" I replied, "I married a matron." The Prophet said, "Why have you
not married a virgin, so that you may play with her and she may play with
you?" Jabir replied, "I have sisters (young in age) so I liked to marry a matron
who could collect them all and comb their hair and look after them." The
Prophet said, "You will reach, so when you have arrived (at home), I advise
you to associate with your wife (that you may have an intelligent son)."
Then he asked me, "Would you like to sell your camel?" I replied in the
affirmative and the Prophet purchased it for one Uqiya of gold. Allah's
Apostle reached before me and I reached in the morning, and when I went
to the mosque, I found him at the door of the mosque. He asked me, "Have
you arrived just now?" I replied in the affirmative. He said, "Leave your
camel and come into (the mosque) and pray two Rakat." I entered and
offered the prayer. He told Bilal to weigh and give me one Uqiya of gold. So
Bilal weighed for me fairly and I went away. The Prophet sent for me and I
thought that he would return to me my camel which I hated more than
anything else. But the Prophet said to me, "Take your camel as well as its
price."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 311:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
'Ukaz, Majanna and Dhul-Majaz were markets in the Pre-lslamic period.
When the people embraced Islam they considered it a sin to trade there. So,
the following Holy Verse came:-- 'There is no harm for you if you seek of the
bounty of your Lord (Allah) in the Hajj season." (2.198) Ibn 'Abbas recited it
like this.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 312:
Narrated 'Amr:
Here (i.e. in Mecca) there was a man called Nawwas and he had camels
suffering from the disease of excessive and unquenchable thirst. Ibn 'Umar
went to the partner of Nawwas and bought those camels. The man returned
to Nawwas and told him that he had sold those camels. Nawwas asked him,
"To whom have you sold them?" He replied, "To such and such Sheikh."
Nawwas said, "Woe to you; By Allah, that Sheikh was Ibn 'Umar." Nawwas
then went to Ibn 'Umar and said to him, "My partner sold you camels
suffering from the disease of excessive thirst and he had not known you."
Ibn 'Umar told him to take them back. When Nawwas went to take them,
Ibn 'Umar said to him, "Leave them there as I am happy with the decision of
Allah's Apostle that there is no oppression . "

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 313:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
We set out with Allah's Apostle in the year of Hunain, (the Prophet gave me
an armor). I sold that armor and bought a garden in the region of the tribe
of Bani Salama and that was the first property I got after embracing Islam.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 314:
Narrated Abu Musa:
Allah's Apostle said, "The example of a good companion (who sits with you)
in comparison with a bad one, is I like that of the musk seller and the
blacksmith's bellows (or furnace); from the first you would either buy musk
or enjoy its good smell while the bellows would either burn your clothes or
your house, or you get a bad nasty smell thereof."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 315:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Abu Taiba cupped Allah's Apostle so he ordered that he be paid one Sa of
dates and ordered his masters to reduce his tax (as he was a slave and had
to pay a tax to them).

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 316:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Once the Prophet got his blood out (medically) and paid that person who
had done it. If it had been illegal, the Prophet would not have paid him.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 317:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:
Once the Prophet sent to 'Umar a silken two-piece garment, and when he
saw 'Umar wearing it, he said to him, "I have not sent it to you to wear. It is
worn by him who has no share in the Hereafter, and I have sent it to you so
that you could benefit by it (i.e. sell it)."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 318:
Narrated Aisha:
(mother of the faithful believers) I bought a cushion with pictures on it.
When Allah's Apostle saw it, he kept standing at the door and did not enter
the house. I noticed the sign of disgust on his face, so I said, "O Allah's
Apostle! I repent to Allah and H is Apostle . (Please let me know) what sin I
have done." Allah's Apostle said, "What about this cushion?" I replied, "I
bought it for you to sit and recline on." Allah's Apostle said, "The painters
(i.e. owners) of these pictures will be punished on the Day of Resurrection.
It will be said to them, 'Put life in what you have created (i.e. painted).' " The
Prophet added, "The angels do not enter a house where there are pictures."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 319:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "O Bani Najjar! Suggest a price for your garden." Part of it
was a ruin and it contained some date palms.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 320:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "The buyer and the seller have the option to cancel or
confirm the bargain before they separate from each other or if the sale is
optional." Nafi said, "Ibn 'Umar used to separate quickly from the seller if he
had bought a thing which he liked."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 321:
Narrated Haklm bin Hizam"
The Prophet said, "The buyer and the seller have the option of cancelling or
confirming the deal unless they separate."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 322:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "The seller and the buyer have the option of cancelling
or confirming the deal unless they separate, or one of them says to the
other, 'Choose (i.e. decide to cancel or confirm the bargain now)." Perhaps
he said, 'Or if it is an optional sale.' " Ibn Umar, Shuraih, Ash-Shabi, Tawus,
Ata, and Ibn Abu Mulaika agree upon this judgment.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 323:
Narrated Hakim bin Hizam:
The Prophet said, "The buyer and the seller have the option of cancelling or
confirming the bargain unless they separate, and if they spoke the truth and
made clear the defects of the goods, them they would be blessed in their
bargain, and if they told lies and hid some facts, their bargain would be
deprived of Allah's blessings."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 324:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: Allah's Apostle said, "Both the buyer and the
seller have the option of cancelling or confirming a bargain unless they
separate, or the sale is optional." (See Hadith No.320).

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 325:
Narrated Ibn Umar: Allah's Apostle said, "Both the buyer and the seller have
the option of cancelling or confirming the bargain, as long as they are stil
together, and unless they separate or one of them gives the other the
option of keeping or re

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 326:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "No deal is settled and finalized unless the buyer and the
seller separate, except if the deal is optional (whereby the validity of the
bargain depends on the stipulations agreed upon)."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 327:
Narrated Hakim bin Hizam:
The Prophet said, "Both the buyer and the seller have the option of
cancelling or confirming the bargain unless they separate." The subnarrator, Hammam said, "I found this in my book: 'Both the buyer and the
seller give the option of either confirming or cancelling the bargain three
times, and if they speak the truth and mention the defects, then their
bargain will be blessed, and if they tell lies and conceal the defects, they
might gain some financial gain but they will deprive their sale of (Allah's)
blessings."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 328:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
A person came to the Prophet and told him that he was always betrayed in
purchasing. The Prophet told him to say at the time of buying, "No
cheating."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 329:
Narrated 'Aisha
Allah's Apostle said, "An army will invade the Ka'ba and when the invaders
reach Al-Baida', all the ground will sink and swallow the whole army." I said,
"O Allah's Apostle! How will they sink into the ground while amongst them
will be their markets (the people who worked in business and not invaders)
and the people not belonging to them?" The Prophet replied, "all of those
people will sink but they will be resurrected and judged according to their
intentions."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 330:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The congregational prayer of anyone amongst you is
more than twenty (five or twenty seven) times in reward than his prayer in
the market or in his house, for if he performs ablution completely and then
goes to the mosque with the sole intention of performing the prayer, and
nothing urges him to proceed to the mosque except the prayer, then, on
every step which he takes towards the mosque, he will be raised one degree
or one of his sins will be forgiven. The angels will keep on asking Allah's
forgiveness and blessings for everyone of you so long as he keeps sitting at
his praying place. The angels will say, 'O Allah, bless him! O Allah, be merciful
to him!' as long as he does not do Hadath or a thing which gives trouble to
the other." The Prophet further said, "One is regarded in prayer so long as
one is waiting for the prayer."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 331:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
While the Prophet was in the market, somebody, called, "O Abu-l-Qasim."
The Prophet turned to him. The man said, "I have called to this (i.e. another
man)." The Prophet said, "Name yourselves by my name but not by my
Kuniya (name)." (In Arabic world it is the custom to call the man as the
father of his eldest son, e.g. Abu-l-Qasim.)
(See Hadith No. 737, Vol. 4)
Volume 3, Book 34, Number 332:
Narrated Anas:
A man at Al-Baqi' called, "O Abu-l-Qasim!" The Prophet turned to him and
the man said (to the Prophet ), "I did not intend to call you." The prophet
said, "Name yourselves by my name but not by my kuniya (name)."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 333:
Narrated Abu Huraira Ad-Dausi:
Once the Prophet went out during the day. Neither did he talk to me nor I to
him till he reached the market of Bani Qainuqa and then he sat in the
compound of Fatima's house and asked about the small boy (his grandson
Al-Hasan) but Fatima kept the boy in for a while. I thought she was either
changing his clothes or giving the boy a bath. After a while the boy came out
running and the Prophet embraced and kissed him and then said, 'O Allah!
Love him, and love whoever loves him.'

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 334:
Narrated Nafi:
Ibn 'Umar told us that the people used to buy food from the caravans in the
lifetime of the Prophet. The Prophet used to forbid them to sell it at the very
place where they had purchased it (but they were to wait) till they carried it
to the market where foodstuff was sold. Ibn 'Umar said, 'The Prophet also
forbade the reselling of foodstuff by somebody who had bought it unless he
had received it with exact full measure'

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 335:
Narrated Ata bin Yasar:
I met Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As and asked him, "Tell me about the
description of Allah's Apostle which is mentioned in Torah (i.e. Old
Testament.") He replied, 'Yes. By Allah, he is described in Torah with some
of the qualities attributed to him in the Quran as follows:
"O Prophet ! We have sent you as a witness (for Allah's True religion) And a
giver of glad tidings (to the faithful believers), And a warner (to the
unbelievers) And guardian of the illiterates. You are My slave and My
messenger (i.e. Apostle). I have named you "Al-Mutawakkil" (who depends
upon Allah). You are neither discourteous, harsh Nor a noise-maker in the
markets And you do not do evil to those Who do evil to you, but you deal
With them with forgiveness and kindness. Allah will not let him (the
Prophet) Die till he makes straight the crooked people by making them say:
"None has the right to be worshipped but Allah," With which will be opened
blind eyes And deaf ears and enveloped hearts."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 336:
Narrated Abdullah ibn Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "He who buys foodstuff should not sell it till he is
satisfied with the measure with which he has bought it.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 337:
Narrated Jabir:
Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Haram died and was in debt to others. I asked the
Prophet to intercede with his creditors for some reduction in the debts. The
Prophet requested them (to reduce the debts) but they refused. The
Prophet said to me, "Go and put your dates (In heaps) according to their
different kinds. The Ajwa on one side, the cluster of Ibn Zaid on another
side, etc.. Then call me." I did that and called the Prophet He came and sat at
the head or in the middle of the heaps and ordered me. Measure (the dates)
for the people (creditors)." I measured for them till I paid all the debts. My
dates remained as it nothing had been taken from them. In other narrations,
Jabir said; The Prophet said, "He (i.e. 'Abdullah) continued measuring for
them till he paid all the debts." The Prophet said (to 'Abdullah), "Cut
(clusters) for him (i.e. one of the creditors) and measure for him fully."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 338:
Narrated Al-Miqdam bin Ma'diyakrib:
The Prophet said, "Measure your foodstuff and you will be blessed."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 339:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid:
The Prophet said, "The Prophet Abraham made Mecca a sanctuary, and
asked for Allah's blessing in it. I made Medina a sanctuary as Abraham made
Mecca a sanctuary and I asked for Allah's Blessing in its measures the Mudd
and the Sa as Abraham did for Mecca.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 340:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "O Allah bestow your blessings on their measures, bless
their Mudd and Sa." The Prophet meant the people of Medina.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 341:
Narrated Salim:
that his father said. "I saw those, who used to buy foodstuff without
measuring or weighing in the life time of the Prophet being punished if they
sold it before carrying it to their own houses."
Volume 3, Book 34, Number 342:
Narrated Tawus:
Ibn 'Abbas said, "Allah's Apostle forbade the selling of foodstuff before its
measuring and transferring into one's possession." I asked Ibn 'Abbas, "How
is that?" Ibn 'Abbas replied, "It will be just like selling money for money, as
the foodstuff has not been handed over to the first purchaser who is the
present seller."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 343:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
The Prophet said, "He who buys foodstuff should not sell it till he has
received it."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 344:
Narrated Az-Zuhri from Malik bin Aus:
that the latter said, "Who has change?" Talha said, "I (will have change)
when our store-keeper comes from the forest."
Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab: Allah's Apostle said, "The bartering of gold
for silver is Riba, (usury), except if it is from hand to hand and equal in
amount, and wheat grain for wheat grain is usury except if it is form hand to
hand and equal in amount, and dates for dates is usury except if it is from
hand to hand and equal in amount, and barley for barley is usury except if it
is from hand to hand and equal in amount." (See Riba-Fadl in the glossary).

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 345:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet forbade the selling of foodstuff before receiving it. I consider
that all types of sellings should be done similarly
Volume 3, Book 34, Number 346:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "The buyer of foodstuff should not sell it before it has
been measured for him." Isma'il narrated instead, "He should not sell it
before receiving it."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 347:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
I saw the people buy foodstuff randomly (i.e. blindly without measuring it)
in the life-time of Allah's Apostle and they were punished (by beating), if
they tried to sell it before carrying it to their own houses.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 348:
Narrated Aisha:
Rarely did the Prophet fail to visit Abu Bakr's house everyday, either in the
morning or in the evening. When the permission for migration to Medina
was granted, all of a sudden the Prophet came to us at noon and Abu Bakr
was informed, who said, "Certainly the Prophet has come for some urgent
matter." The Prophet said to Abu Bark, when the latter entered "Let nobody
stay in your home." Abu Bakr said, "O Allah's Apostle! There are only my two
daughters (namely 'Aisha and Asma') present." The Prophet said, "I feel (am
informed) that I have been granted the permission for migration." Abu Bakr
said, "I will accompany you, O Allah's Apostle!" The Prophet said, "You will
accompany me." Abu Bakr then said "O Allah's Apostle! I have two shecamels I have prepared specially for migration, so I offer you one of them.
The Prophet said, "I have accepted it on the condition that I will pay its
price."
Volume 3, Book 34, Number 349:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Do not urge somebody to return what he has already
bought (i.e. in optional sale) from another seller so as to sell him your own
goods."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 350:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle forbade the selling of things by a town dweller on behalf of a
desert dweller; and similarly Najsh was forbidden. And one should not urge
somebody to return the goods to the seller so as to sell him his own goods;
nor should one demand the hand of a girl who has already been engaged to
someone else; and a woman should not try to cause some other woman to
be divorced in order to take her place.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 351:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
A man decided that a slave of his would be manumitted after his death and
later on he was in need of money, so the Prophet took the slave and said,
"Who will buy this slave from me?" Nu'aim bin 'Abdullah bought him for
such and such price and the Prophet gave him the slave.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 352:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle forbade Najsh.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 353:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle forbade the sale called 'Habal-al-Habala which was a kind of
sale practiced in the Pre-lslamic Period of ignorance. One would pay the
price of a she-camel which was not born yet would be born by the
immediate offspring of an extant she-camel.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 354:
Narrated Abu Said:
Allah's Apostle forbade the selling by Munabadha, i.e. to sell one's garment
by casting it to the buyer not allowing him to examine or see it. Similarly he
forbade the selling by Mulamasa. Mulamasa is to buy a garment, for
example, by merely touching it, not looking at it.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 355:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet forbade two kinds of dressing; (one of them) is to sit with one's
legs drawn up while wrapped in one garment. (The other) is to lift that
garment on one's shoulders. And also forbade two kinds of sale: Al-Limas
and An-Nibadh.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 356:
Narrated Abu Huraira :
Allah's Apostle forbade selling by Mulamasa and Munabadha.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 357:
Narrated Abu Said:
The Prophet forbade two kinds of dresses and two kinds of sale, i.e.,
Mulamasa and Munabadha.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 358:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Don't keep camels and sheep unmilked for a long time,
for whoever buys such an animal has the option to milk it and then either to
keep it or return it to the owner along with one Sa of dates." Some narrated
from Ibn Sirin (that the Prophet had said), "One Sa of wheat, and he has the
option for three days." And some narrated from Ibn Sirin, " ... a Sa of dates,"
not mentioning the option for three days. But a Sa of dates is mentioned in
most narrations.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 359:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud:
Whoever buys a sheep which has not been milked for a long time, has the
option of returning it along with one Sa of dates; and the Prophet forbade
going to meet the seller on the way (as he has no knowledge of the market
price and he may sell his goods at a low price).

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 360:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Do not go forward to meet the caravan (to buy from it
on the way before it reaches the town). And do not urge buyers to cancel
their purchases to sell them (your own goods) yourselves, and do not
practice Najsh. A town dweller should not sell the goods for the desert
dweller. Do not leave sheep unmilked for a long time, when they are on sale,
and whoever buys such an animal has the option of returning it, after
milking it, along with a Sa of dates or keeping it. it has been kept unmilked
for a long period by the seller (to deceive others).

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 361:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever buys a sheep which has been kept unmilked
for a long period, and milks it, can keep it if he is satisfied, and if he is not
satisfied, he can return it, but he should pay one Sa of dates for the milk."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 362:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "If a slave-girl commits illegal sexual intercourse and it is
proved beyond doubt, then her owner should lash her and should not blame
her after the legal punishment. And then if she repeats the illegal sexual
intercourse he should lash her again and should not blame her after the
legal punishment, and if she commits it a third time, then he should sell her
even for a hair rope."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 363:
Narrated Abu Huraira and Zaid bin Khalid:
Allah's Apostle was asked about the slave-girl, if she was a virgin and
committed illegal sexual intercourse. The Prophet said, "If she committed
illegal sexual intercourse, lash her, and if she did it a second time, then lash
her again, and if she repeated the third time, then sell her even for a hair
rope." Ibn Shihab said, "I don't know whether to sell her after the third or
fourth offense."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 364:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle came to me and I told him about the slave-girl (Buraira)
Allah's Apostle said, "Buy and manumit her, for the Wala is for the one who
manumits." In the evening the Prophet got up and glorified Allah as He
deserved and then said, "Why do some people impose conditions which are
not present in Allah's Book (Laws)? Whoever imposes such a condition as is
not in Allah's Laws, then that condition is invalid even if he imposes one
hundred conditions, for Allah's conditions are more binding and reliable."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 365:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
Aisha wanted to buy Buraira and he (the Prophet ) went out for the prayer.
When he returned, she told him that they (her masters) refused to sell her
except on the condition that her Wala' would go to them. The Prophet
replied, 'The Wala' would go to him who manumits.' " Hammam asked Nafi'
whether her (Buraira's) husband was a free man or a slave. He replied that
he did not know.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 366:
Narrated Jarir:
I have given a pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle for to testify that None
has the right to be worshipped but Allah, and Muhammad is His Apostle, to
offer prayers perfectly, to pay Zakat, to listen to and obey (Allah's and His
Prophet's orders), and to give good advice to every Muslim.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 367:
Narrated Tawus:
Ibn 'Abbas said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'Do not go to meet the caravans on
the way (for buying their goods without letting them know the market
price); a town dweller should not sell the goods of a desert dweller on
behalf of the latter.' I asked Ibn 'Abbas, 'What does he mean by not selling
the goods of a desert dweller by a town dweller?' He said, 'He should not
become his broker.' "

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 368:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:
Allah's Apostle forbade the selling of the goods of a desert dweller by a
town person.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 369:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "A buyer should not urge a seller to restore a purchase
so as to buy it himself, and do not practice Najsh; and a town dweller should
not sell goods of a desert dweller."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 370:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
We were forbidden that a town dweller should sell goods of a desert
dweller.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 371:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet forbade the meeting (of caravans) on the way and the selling
of goods by an inhabitant of the town on behalf of a desert dweller.
Volume 3, Book 34, Number 372:
Narrated Tawus:
I asked Ibn 'Abbas, "What is the meaning of, 'No town dweller should sell
(or buy) for a desert dweller'?" Ibn 'Abbas said, "It means he should not
become his broker."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 373:
Narrated Abdullah:
Whoever buys an animal which has been kept unmilked for a long time,
could return it, but has to pay a Sa of dates along with it. And the Prophet
forbade meeting the owners of goods on the way away from the market.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 374:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "You should not try to cancel the purchases of one
another (to get a benefit thereof), and do not go ahead to meet the caravan
(for buying the goods) (but wait) till it reaches the market."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 375:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
We used to go ahead to meet the caravan and used to buy foodstuff from
them. The Prophet forbade us to sell it till it was carried to the market.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 376:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
Some people used to buy foodstuff at the head of the market and used to
sell it on the spot. Allah's Apostle forbade them to sell it till they brought it
to (their) places.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 377:
Narrated 'Urwa:
Aisha said, "Buraira came to me and said, 'I have agreed with my masters to
pay them nine Uqiyas (of gold) (in installments) one Uqiya per year; please
help me.' I said, 'I am ready to pay the whole amount now provided your
masters agree that your Wala will be for me.' So, Buraira went to her
masters and told them about that offer but they refused to accept it. She
returned, and at that time, Allah's Apostle was sitting (present). Buraira said,
'I told them of the offer but they did not accept it and insisted on having the
Wala.'.' The Prophet heard that." 'Aisha narrated the whole story to the
Prophet . He said to her, "Buy her and stipulate that her Wala' would be
yours as the Wala' is for the manumitted." 'Aisha did so. Then Allah's
Apostle stood up in front of the people, and after glorifying Allah he said,
"Amma Badu (i.e. then after)! What about the people who impose
conditions which are not in Allah's Book (Laws)? Any condition that is not in
Allah's Book (Laws) is invalid even if they were one hundred conditions, for
Allah's decisions are the right ones and His conditions are the strong ones
(firmer) and the Wala' will be for the manumitted."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 378:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Aisha, (mother of the faithful believers) wanted to buy a slave girl and
manumit her, but her masters said that they would sell her only on the
condition that her Wala' would be for them. 'Aisha told Allah's Apostle of
that. He said, "What they stipulate should not hinder you from buying her,
as the Wala' is for the manumitted."
Volume 3, Book 34, Number 379:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "The selling of wheat for wheat is Riba (usury) except if it
is handed from hand to hand and equal in amount. Similarly the selling of
barley for barley, is Riba except if it is from hand to hand and equal in
amount, and dates for dates is usury except if it is from hand to hand and
equal in amount. (See Riba-Fadl in the glossary).

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 380:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle forbade Muzabana; and Muzabana is the selling of fresh
dates for dried old dates by measure, and the selling of fresh grapes for
dried grapes by measure.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 381:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet forbade Muzabana; and Muzabana is the selling of fresh fruit
(without measuring it) for something by measure on the basis that if that
thing turns to be more than the fruit, the increase would be for the seller of
the fruit, and if it turns to be less, that would be of his lot.
Narrated Ibn 'Umar from Zaid bin Thabit that the Prophet allowed the
selling of the fruits on the trees after estimation (when they are ripe).

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 382:
Narrated Ibn Shihab:
that Malik bin Aus said, "I was in need of change for one-hundred Dinars.
Talha bin 'Ubaid-Ullah called me and we discussed the matter, and he
agreed to change (my Dinars). He took the gold pieces in his hands an
fidgeted with them, and then said, "Wait till my storekeeper comes from the
forest." 'Umar was listening to that and said, "By Allah! You should not
separate from Talha till you get the money from him, for Allah's Apostle
said, 'The selling of gold for gold is Riba (usury) except if the exchange is
from hand to hand and equal in amount, and similarly, the selling of wheat
for wheat is Riba (usury) unless it is from hand to hand and equal in amount,
and the selling of barley for barley is usury unless it is from hand to hand and
equal in amount, and dates for dates, is usury unless it is from hand to hand
and equal in amount"

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 383:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
Allah's Apostle said, "Don't sell gold for gold unless equal in weight, nor
silver for silver unless equal in weight, but you could sell gold for silver or
silver for gold as you like."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 384:
Narrated Abu Said:
(Concerning exchange) that he heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Do not sell
gold for gold unless equal in weight, and do not sell silver unless equal in
weight."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 385:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle said, "Do not sell gold for gold unless equivalent in weight,
and do not sell less amount for greater amount or vice versa; and do not sell
silver for silver unless equivalent in weight, and do not sell less amount for
greater amount or vice versa and do not sell gold or silver that is not present
at the moment of exchange for gold or silver that is present.
Volume 3, Book 34, Number 386:
Narrated Abu Salih Az-Zaiyat:
I heard Abu Said Al-Khudri saying, "The selling of a Dinar for a Dinar, and a
Dirham for a Dirham (is permissible)." I said to him, "Ibn 'Abbas does not say
the same." Abu Said replied, "I asked Ibn 'Abbas whether he had heard it
from the Prophet s or seen it in the Holy Book. Ibn 'Abbas replied, "I do not
claim that, and you know Allah's Apostle better than I, but Usama informed
me that the Prophet had said, 'There is no Riba (in money exchange) except
when it is not done from hand to hand (i.e. when there is delay in payment).'
"

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 387:
Narrated Abu Al-Minhal:
I asked Al-Bara' bin 'Azib and Zaid bin Arqam about money exchanges. Each
of them said, "This is better than I," and both of them said, "Allah's Apostle
forbade the selling of silver for gold on credit. "

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 388:
Narrated Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakra:
that his father said, "The Prophet forbade the selling of gold for gold and
silver for silver except if they are equivalent in weight, and allowed us to sell
gold for silver and vice versa as we wished."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 389:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Do not sell fruits of dates until they become free from
all the dangers of being spoilt or blighted; and do not sell fresh dates for dry
dates."
Narrated Salim and 'Abdullah from Zaid bin Habit' "Later on Allah's Apostle
permitted the selling of ripe fruits on trees for fresh dates or dried dates in
Bai'-l-'Araya, and did not allow it for any other kind of sale."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 390:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle forbade Muzabana; and Muzabana means the selling of fresh
dates (on the trees) for dried dates by measure and also the selling of fresh
grapes for dried grapes by measure.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 391:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle forbade Muzabana and Muhaqala; and Muzabana means the
selling of ripe dates for dates still on the trees.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 392:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet forbade Muzabana and Muhaqala.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 393:
Narrated Zaid bin Thabit:
Allah's Apostle al lowed the owner of 'Araya to sell the fruits on the trees by
means of estimation.
Volume 3, Book 34, Number 394:
Narrated Jabir:
The Prophet forbade the selling of fruits unless they get ripe, and none of
them should be sold except for Dinar or Dirham (i.e. money), except the
'Araya trees (the dates of which could be sold for dates).

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 395:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet allowed the sale of the dates of 'Araya provided they were
about five Awsuq (singular: Wasaq which means sixty Sa's) or less (in
amount).

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 396:
Narrated Sahl bin Abu Hathma:
Allah's Apostle forbade the selling of fruits (fresh dates) for dried dates but
allowed the sale of fruits on the 'Araya by estimation and their new owners
might eat their dates fresh. Sufyan (in another narration) said, "I told Yahya
(a sub-narrator) when I was a mere boy, 'Meccans say that the Prophet
allowed them the sale of the fruits on 'Araya by estimation.' Yahya asked,
'How do the Meccans know about it?' I replied, 'They narrated it (from the
Prophet ) through Jabir.' On that, Yahya kept quiet." Sufyan said, "I meant
that Jabir belonged to Medina." Sufyan was asked whether in Jabir's
narration there was any prohibition of selling fruits before their benefit is
evident (i.e. no dangers of being spoilt or blighted). He replied that there
was none.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 397:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar from Zaid bin Thabit:
Allah's Apostle allowed the sale of 'Araya by estimating the dates on them
for measured amounts of dried dates. Musa bin 'Uqba said, "Al- 'Araya were
distinguished date palms; one could come and buy them (i.e. their fruits)."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 398:
Narrated Zaid:
Same as above (Hadith 397).

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 399:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle forbade the sale of fruits till their benefit is evident. He
forbade both the seller and the buyer (such sale).

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 400:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle forbade the sale of date fruits till they were ripe. Abu
'Abdullah (Al-Bukhari) said, "That means till they were red (can be eaten)."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 401:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet forbade the s of (date) fruits till they were red or yellow and fit
for eating.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 402:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet forbade the sale of fruits till their benefit is evident; and the
sale of date palms till the dates are almost ripe. He was asked what 'are
almost ripe' meant. He replied, "Got red and yellow."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 403:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle forbade the sale of fruits till they are almost ripe. He was
asked what is meant by 'are almost ripe.' He replied, "Till they become red."
Allah's Apostle further said, "If Allah spoiled the fruits, what right would one
have to take the money of one's brother (i.e. other people)?"
Narrated Ibn Shihab: If somebody bought fruits before their benefit is
evident and then the fruits were spoiled with blights, the loss would be
suffered by the owner (not the buyer).
Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah from Ibn Umar: Allah's Apostle said, "Do not
sell or buy fruits before their benefit was evident and do not sell fresh fruits
(dates) for dried dates."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 404:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet bought some foodstuff from a Jew on credit and mortgaged
his armor to him.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 405:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri and Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle appointed somebody as a governor of Khaibar. That
governor brought to him an excellent kind of dates (from Khaibar). The
Prophet asked, "Are all the dates of Khaibar like this?" He replied, "By Allah
no, O Allah's Apostle! But we barter one Sa of this (type of dates) for two
Sas of dates of ours and two Sas of it for three of ours." Allah's Apostle said,
"Do not do so (as that is a kind of usury) but sell the mixed dates (of inferior
quality) for money, and then buy good dates with that money."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 406:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "If somebody sells pollinated date palms, the fruits will
be for the seller unless the buyer stipulates that they will be for himself (and
the seller agrees)."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 407:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle forbade Al-Muzabana, i.e. to sell ungathered dates of one's
garden for measured dried dates or fresh ungathered grapes for measured
dried grapes; or standing crops for measured quantity of foodstuff. He
forbade all such bargains.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 408:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "Whoever pollinates date palms and then sells them, the
fruits will belong to him unless the buyer stipulates that the fruits should
belong to him (and the seller agrees)."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 409:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle forbade Muhaqala, Mukhadara, Mulamasa, Munabadha and
Muzabana. (See glossary and previous Hadiths for the meanings of these
terms.)

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 410:
Narrated Humaid:
Anas said, "The Prophet forbade the selling of dates till they were almost
ripe." We asked Anas, "What does 'almost ripe' mean?" He replied, "They
get red and yellow. The Prophet added, 'If Allah destroyed the fruits present
on the trees, what right would the seller have to take the money of his
brother (somebody else)?' "

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 411:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
I was with the Prophet while he was eating spadix. He said, "From the trees
there is a tree which resembles a faithful believer." I wanted to say that it
was the date palm, but I was the youngest among them (so I kept quiet). He
added, "It is the date palm." Shuraih told the weavers, "You are permitted
to follow your own conventions to solve your problems (it is legal for you to
stick to your traditions in bargain) . "
Narrated 'Abdul Wahab: Aiyub said: Muhammad said, "There is no harm in
selling for eleven what you buy for ten, and you are allowed to take a profit
for expenses . "
The Prophet told Hind, "Take what is reasonable and sufficient for you and
your sons." Allah says: Whoever is poor, can eat (from the orphan's
property) reasonably (according to his labors).
Al-Hasan hired a donkey from 'Abdullah bin Mirdas and asked him about the
hire. The latter replied that it was for two Daniqs (a Daniq equals 116th
Dirham). So Al-Hasan rode away. Another time, Al-Hasan came to 'Abdullah
bin Mirdas and asked him to hire the donkey to him and rode away without
asking him about the hire, but he sent him half a Dirham.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 412:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Abu Taiba cupped Allah's Apostle and so Allah's Apostle ordered that a Sa of
dates be paid to him and ordered his masters (for he was a slave) to reduce
his tax.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 413:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Hind, the mother of Mu'awiya said to Allah's Apostle, "Abu Sufyan (her
husband) is a miser. Am I allowed to take from his money secretly?" The
Prophet said to her, "You and your sons may take what is sufficient
reasonably and fairly."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 414:
Narrated Hisham bin 'Urwa from his father:
who heard Aisha saying, "The Holy Verse; 'Whoever amongst the guardians
is rich, he should take no wages (from the property of the orphans) but If he
is poor, let him have for himself what is just and reasonable (according to his
labors)' (4.6) was revealed concerning the guardian of the orphans who
looks after them and manages favorably their financial affairs; If the
guardian Is poor, he could have from It what Is just and reasonable,
(according to his labors)."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 415:
Narrated Jabir
Allah's Apostle gave pre-emption (to the partner) in every joint property,
but if the boundaries of the property were demarcated or the ways and
streets were fixed, then there was no pre-emption.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 416:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle decided the validity of pre-emption in every joint undivided
property, but if the boundaries were well marked or the ways and streets
were fixed, then there was no pre-emption.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 417:
Narrated Mussaddad from 'Abdul Wahid:
the same as above but said, "... in every joint undivided thing..." Narrated
Hisham from Ma'mar the same as above but said, " ... in every property... "

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 418:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "While three persons were walking, rain began to fall and
they had to enter a cave in a mountain. A big rock rolled over and blocked
the mouth of the cave. They said to each other, 'Invoke Allah with the best
deed you have performed (so Allah might remove the rock)'. One of them
said, 'O Allah! My parents were old and I used to go out for grazing (my
animals). On my return I would milk (the animals) and take the milk in a
vessel to my parents to drink. After they had drunk from it, I would give it to
my children, family and wife. One day I was delayed and on my return I
found my parents sleeping, and I disliked to wake them up. The children
were crying at my feet (because of hunger). That state of affairs continued
till it was dawn. O Allah! If You regard that I did it for Your sake, then please
remove this rock so that we may see the sky.' So, the rock was moved a bit.
The second said, 'O Allah! You know that I was in love with a cousin of mine,
like the deepest love a man may have for a woman, and she told me that I
would not get my desire fulfilled unless I paid her one-hundred Dinars (gold
pieces). So, I struggled for it till I gathered the desired amount, and when I
sat in between her legs, she told me to be afraid of Allah, and asked me not
to deflower her except rightfully (by marriage). So, I got up and left her. O
Allah! If You regard that I did if for Your sake, kindly remove this rock.' So,
two-thirds of the rock was removed. Then the third man said, 'O Allah! No
doubt You know that once I employed a worker for one Faraq (three Sa's) of
millet, and when I wanted to pay him, he refused to take it, so I sowed it and
from its yield I bought cows and a shepherd. After a time that man came and
demanded his money. I said to him: Go to those cows and the shepherd and
take them for they are for you. He asked me whether I was joking with him. I
told him that I was not joking with him, and all that belonged to him. O
Allah! If You regard that I did it sincerely for Your sake, then please remove
the rock.' So, the rock was removed completely from the mouth of the
cave."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 419:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr:
We were with the Prophet when a tall pagan with long matted unkempt hair
came driving his sheep. The Prophet asked him, "Are those sheep for sale or
for gifts?" The pagan replied, "They are for sale." The Prophet bought one
sheep from him.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 420:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The Prophet Abraham emigrated with Sarah and entered
a village where there was a king or a tyrant. (The king) was told that
Abraham had entered (the village) accompanied by a woman who was one
of the most charming women. So, the king sent for Abraham and asked, 'O
Abraham! Who is this lady accompanying you?' Abraham replied, 'She is my
sister (i.e. in religion).' Then Abraham returned to her and said, 'Do not
contradict my statement, for I have informed them that you are my sister.
By Allah, there are no true believers on this land except you and 1.' Then
Abraham sent her to the king. When the king got to her, she got up and
performed ablution, prayed and said, 'O Allah! If I have believed in You and
Your Apostle, and have saved my private parts from everybody except my
husband, then please do not let this pagan overpower me.' On that the king
fell in a mood of agitation and started moving his legs. Seeing the condition
of the king, Sarah said, 'O Allah! If he should die, the people will say that I
have killed him.' The king regained his power, and proceeded towards her
but she got up again and performed ablution, prayed and said, 'O Allah! If I
have believed in You and Your Apostle and have kept my private parts safe
from all except my husband, then please do not let this pagan overpower
me.' The king again fell in a mood of agitation and started moving his legs.
On seeing that state of the king, Sarah said, 'O Allah! If he should die, the
people will say that I have killed him.' The king got either two or three
attacks, and after recovering from the last attack he said, 'By Allah! You have
sent a satan to me. Take her to Abraham and give her Ajar.' So she came
back to Abraham and said, 'Allah humiliated the pagan and gave us a
slavegirl for service."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 421:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Sad bin Abi Waqqas and 'Abu bin Zam'a quarreled over a boy. Sad said, "O
Allah's Apostle! This boy is the son of my brother ('Utba bin Abi Waqqas)
who took a promise from me that I would take him as he was his (illegal)
son. Look at him and see whom he resembles." 'Abu bin Zam'a said, "O
Allah's Apostle! This is my brother and was born on my father's bed from his
slave-girl." Allah's Apostle cast a look at the boy and found definite
resemblance to 'Utba and then said, "The boy is for you, O 'Abu bin Zam'a.
The child goes to the owner of the bed and the adulterer gets nothing but
the stones (despair, i.e. to be stoned to death). Then the Prophet said, "O
Sauda bint Zama! Screen yourself from this boy." So, Sauda never saw him
again.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 422:
Narrated Sad that his father said:
Abdur-Rahman bin Auf said to Suhaib, 'Fear Allah and do not ascribe yourself
to somebody other than your father.' Suhaib replied, 'I would not like to say
it even if I were given large amounts of money, but I say I was kidnapped in
my childhood.' "

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 423:
Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair:
Hakim bin Hizam said, "O Allah's Apostle! I used to do good deeds in the Prelslamic period of Ignorance, e.g., keeping good relations with my Kith and
kin, manumitting slaves and giving alms. Shall I receive a reward for all that?"
Allah's Apostle replied, "You embraced Islam with all the good deeds which
you did in the past."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 424:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
Once Allah's Apostle passed by a dead sheep and said to the people,
"Wouldn't you benefit by its skin?" The people replied that it was dead. The
Prophet said, "But its eating only is illegal."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 425:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "By Him in Whose Hands my soul is, son of Mary (Jesus)
will shortly descend amongst you people (Muslims) as a just ruler and will
break the Cross and kill the pig and abolish the Jizya (a tax taken from the
non-Muslims, who are in the protection, of the Muslim government). Then
there will be abundance of money and no-body will accept charitable gifts.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 426:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Once 'Umar was informed that a certain man sold alcohol. 'Umar said, "May
Allah curse him! Doesn't he know that Allah's Apostle said, 'May Allah curse
the Jews, for Allah had forbidden them to eat the fat of animals but they
melted it and sold it."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 427:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "May Allah curse the Jews, because Allah made fat
illegal for them but they sold it and ate its price. "

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 428:
Narrated Said bin Abu Al-Hasan:
While I was with Ibn 'Abbas a man came and said, "O father of 'Abbas! My
sustenance is from my manual profession and I make these pictures." Ibn
'Abbas said, "I will tell you only what I heard from Allah's Apostle . I heard
him saying, 'Whoever makes a picture will be punished by Allah till he puts
life in it, and he will never be able to put life in it.' " Hearing this, that man
heaved a sigh and his face turned pale. Ibn 'Abbas said to him, "What a pity!
If you insist on making pictures I advise you to make pictures of trees and
any other unanimated objects."
Volume 3, Book 34, Number 429:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When the last verses of Surat-al-Baqara were revealed, the Prophet went
out (of his house to the Mosque) and said, "The trade of alcohol has become
illegal."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 430:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah says, 'I will be against three persons on the Day of
Resurrection:
1. One who makes a covenant in My Name, but he proves treacherous.
2. One who sells a free person (as a slave) and eats the price,
3. And one who employs a laborer and gets the full work done by him but
does not pay him his wages.' "

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 431:
Narrated Anas:
Amongst the captives was Safiya. First she was given to Dihya Al-Kalbi and
then to the Prophet.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 432:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
that while he was sitting with Allah's Apostle he said, "O Allah's Apostle! We
get female captives as our share of booty, and we are interested in their
prices, what is your opinion about coitus interrupt us?" The Prophet said,
"Do you really do that? It is better for you not to do it. No soul that which
Allah has destined to exist, but will surely come into existence.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 433:
Narrated Jabir:
The Prophet sold a Mudabbar (on behalf of his master who was still living
and in need of money).

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 434:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle sold a Mudabbar.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 435:
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid and Abu Huraira:
that Allah's Apostle was asked about an unmarried slave-girl who committed
illegal sexual intercourse. They heard him saying, "Flog her, and if she
commits illegal sexual intercourse after that, flog her again, and on the third
(or the fourth) offense, sell her."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 436:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard the Prophet saying, "If a slave-girl of yours commits illegal sexual
intercourse and her illegal sexual intercourse is proved, she should be
lashed, and after that nobody should blame her, and if she commits illegal
sexual intercourse the second time, she should be lashed and nobody
should blame her after that, and if she does the offense for the third time
and her illegal sexual intercourse is proved, she should be sold even for a
hair rope."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 437:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet came to Khaibar and when Allah made him victorious and he
conquered the town by breaking the enemy's defense, the beauty of Safiya
bint Huyai bin Akhtab was mentioned to him and her husband had been
killed while she was a bride. Allah's Apostle selected her for himself and he
set out in her company till he reached Sadd-ar-Rawha' where her menses
were over and he married her. Then Hais (a kind of meal) was prepared and
served on a small leather sheet (used for serving meals). Allah's Apostle
then said to me, "Inform those who are around you (about the wedding
banquet)." So that was the marriage banquet given by Allah's Apostle for
(his marriage with) Safiya. After that we proceeded to Medina and I saw
that Allah's Apostle was covering her with a cloak while she was behind him.
Then he would sit beside his camel and let Safiya put her feet on his knees to
ride (the camel).

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 438:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
I heard Allah's Apostle, in the year of the Conquest of Mecca, saying, "Allah
and His Apostle made illegal the trade of alcohol, dead animals, pigs and
idols." The people asked, "O Allah's Apostle! What about the fat of dead
animals, for it was used for greasing the boats and the hides; and people use
it for lights?" He said, "No, it is illegal." Allah's Apostle further said, "May
Allah curse the Jews, for Allah made the fat (of animals) illegal for them, yet
they melted the fat and sold it and ate its price."

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 439:
Narrated Abu Mas'ud Al-Ansari:
Allah's Apostle forbade taking the price of a dog, money earned by
prostitution and the earnings of a soothsayer.

Volume 3, Book 34, Number 440:
Narrated Aun bin Abu Juhaifa:
I saw my father buying a slave whose profession was cupping, and ordered
that his instruments (of cupping) be broken. I asked him the reason for
doing so. He replied, "Allah's Apostle prohibited taking money for blood, the
price of a dog, and the earnings of a slave-girl by prostitution; he cursed her
who tattoos and her who gets tattooed, the eater of Riba (usury), and the
maker of pictures."
BOOK 35. SALES IN WHICH A PRICE IS PAID FOR GOODS TO BE DELIVERED LATER (AS-SALAM) (441-460)
Volume 3, Book 35, Number 441:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Allah's Apostle came to Medina and the people used to pay in advance the
price of fruits to be delivered within one or two years. (The sub-narrator is in
doubt whether it was one to two years or two to three years.) The Prophet
said, "Whoever pays money in advance for dates (to be delivered later)
should pay it for known specified weight and measure (of the dates)."

Volume 3, Book 35, Number 442:
Narrated Ibn Abi Najih:
as above, mentioning only specific measure.

Volume 3, Book 35, Number 443:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet came to Medina and the people used to pay in advance the
price of dates to be delivered within two or three years. He said (to them),
"Whoever pays in advance the price of a thing to be delivered later should
pay it for a specified measure at specified weight for a specified period."

Volume 3, Book 35, Number 444:
Narrated Ibn Abi Najih:
as above, saying, "He should pay the price in advance for a specified
measure and for a specified period."
Volume 3, Book 35, Number 445:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet came (to Medina) and he told the people (regarding the
payment of money in advance that they should pay it) for a known specified
measure and a known specified weight and a known specified period.

Volume 3, Book 35, Number 446:
Narrated Shu'ba:
Muhammad or 'Abdullah bin Abu Al-Mujalid said, "Abdullah bin Shaddad and
Abu Burda differed regarding As-Salam, so they sent me to Ibn Abi Aufa and
I asked him about it. He replied, 'In the life-time of Allah's Apostle, Abu Bakr
and 'Umar, we used to pay in advance the prices of wheat, barley, dried
grapes and dates to be delivered later. I also asked Ibn Abza and he, too,
replied as above.' "

Volume 3, Book 35, Number 447:
Narrated Muhammad bin Al-Majalid:
Abdullah bin Shaddad and Abu Burda sent me to 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa and
told me to ask 'Abdullah whether the people in the life-time of the Prophet
used to pay in advance for wheat (to be delivered later). Abdullah replied,
"We used to pay in advance to the peasants of Sham for wheat, barley and
olive oil of a known specified measure to be delivered in a specified period."
I asked (him), "Was the price paid (in advance) to those who had the things
to be delivered later?" Abdullah bin Aufa replied, "We did not use to ask
them about that." Then they sent me to 'Abdur Rahman bin Abza and I
asked him. He replied, "The companions of the Prophet used to practice
Salam in the life-time of the Prophet; and we did not use to ask them
whether they had standing crops or not."
Volume 3, Book 35, Number 448:
Narrated Muhammad bin Abi Al-Mujalid:
as above (446) and said, "We used to pay them in advance for wheat and
barley (to be delivered later). Narrated Ash-Shaibani--"And also for oil."

Volume 3, Book 35, Number 449:
Narrated Ash-Shaibani:
who said "We used to pay in advance for wheat barley and dried grapes."

Volume 3, Book 35, Number 450:
Narrated Abu Bakhtari At-Tai:
I asked Ibn 'Abbas about Salam for (the fruits of) date-palms. He replied
"The Prophet forbade the sale a dates on the trees till they became fit for
eating and could be weighed." A man asked what to be weighed (as the
dates were still on the trees). Another man sitting beside Ibn 'Abbas replied,
"Till they are cut and stored." Narrated Abu Al-Bakhtari: I heard Ibn Abbas
(saying) that the Prophet forbade ... etc. as above.

Volume 3, Book 35, Number 451:
Narrated Abu Al-Bakhtari:
I asked Ibn Umar about Salam (the fruits of) date-palms. He replied, "The
Prophet forbade the sale of dates till their benefit becomes evident and fit
for eating and also the sale of silver (for gold) on credit." I asked Ibn 'Abbas
about Salam for dates and he replied, "The Prophet forbade the sale of
dates till they were fit for eating and could be estimated."
Volume 3, Book 35, Number 452:
Narrated Abu Al-Bakhtari:
I asked Ibn 'Umar about Salam for dates. Ibn 'Umar replied, "The Prophet
forbade the sale (the fruits) of datepalms until they were fit for eating and
also forbade the sale of silver for gold on credit." I also asked Ibn 'Abbas
about it. Ibn 'Abbas replied, "The Prophet forbade the sale of dates till they
were fit for eating, and could be weighed." I asked him, "What is to be
weighed (as the dates are on the trees)?" A man sitting by Ibn 'Abbas said,
"It means till they are cut and stored."

Volume 3, Book 35, Number 453:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle bought some foodstuff (barley) from a Jew on credit and
mortgaged his iron armor to him (the armor stands for a guarantor).

Volume 3, Book 35, Number 454:
Narrated Al-A'mash:
We argued at Ibrahim's dwelling place about mortgaging in Salam. He said,
"Aisha said, 'The Prophet bought some foodstuff from a Jew on credit and
the payment was to be made by a definite period, and he mortgaged his iron
armor to him."

Volume 3, Book 35, Number 455:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet came to Medina and the people used to pay in advance the
prices of fruits to be delivered within two to three years. The Prophet said
(to them), "Buy fruits by paying their prices in advance on condition that the
fruits are to be delivered to you according to a fixed specified measure
within a fixed specified period." Ibn Najih said, " ... by specified measure and
specified weight."

Volume 3, Book 35, Number 456:
Narrated Muhammad bin Abi Al-Mujalid:
Abu Burda and 'Abdullah bin Shaddad sent me to 'Abdur Rahman bin Abza
and 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa to ask them about the Salaf (Salam). They said,
"We used to get war booty while we were with Allah's Apostle and when
the peasants of Sham came to us we used to pay them in advance for
wheat, barley, and oil to be delivered within a fixed period." I asked them,
"Did the peasants own standing crops or not?" They replied, "We never
asked them about it."

Volume 3, Book 35, Number 457:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The people used to sell camels on the basis of Habal-al-Habala. The Prophet
forbade such sale. Nafi' explained Habalal-Habala by saying. "The camel is to
be delivered to the buyer after the she-camel gives birth."

Volume 3, Book 35, Number 458:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle gave a verdict regarding Shuf'a in every undivided joint thing
(property). But if the limits are defined (or demarcated) or the ways and
streets are fixed, then there is no pre-emption.

Volume 3, Book 35, Number 459:
Narrated 'Amr bin Ash-Sharid:
While I was standing with Sad bin Abi Waqqas, Al-Miswar bin Makhrama
came and put his hand on my shoulder. Meanwhile Abu Rafi', the freed slave
of the Prophet came and asked Sad to buy from him the (two) dwellings
which were in his house. Sad said, "By Allah I will not buy them." Al-Miswar
said, "By Allah, you shall buy them." Sad replied, "By Allah, I will not pay
more than four thousand (Dirhams) by installments." Abu Rafi' said, "I have
been offered five hundred Dinars (for it) and had I not heard the Prophet
saying, 'The neighbor has more right than anyone else because of his
nearness, I would not give them to you for four-thousand (Dirhams) while I
am offered five-hundred Dinars (one Dinar equals ten Dirhams) for them."
So, he sold it to Sad.

Volume 3, Book 35, Number 460:
Narrated Aisha:
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have two neighbors and would like to know to
which of them I should give presents." He replied, "To the one whose door
is nearer to you."
BOOK 36. HIRING (461-485)
Volume 3, Book 36, Number 461:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari:
The Prophet said, "The honest treasurer who gives willingly what he is
ordered to give, is one of the two charitable persons, (the second being the
owner)."

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 462:
Narrated Abu Musa:
I went to the Prophet with two men from Ash-ari tribe. I said (to the
Prophet), "I do not know that they want employment." The Prophet said,
"No, we do not appoint for our jobs anybody who demands it earnestly."

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 463:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah did not send any prophet but shepherded sheep."
His companions asked him, "Did you do the same?" The Prophet replied,
"Yes, I used to shepherd the sheep of the people of Mecca for some Qirats."

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 464:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet and Abu Bakr employed a (pagan) man from the tribe of Bani
Ad-Dail and the tribe of Bani 'Abu bin 'Adi as a guide. He was an expert guide
and he broke the oath contract which he had to abide by with the tribe of Al'Asi bin Wail and he was on the religion of Quraish pagans. The Prophet and
Abu Bakr had confidence in him and gave him their riding camels and told
him to bring them to the Cave of Thaur after three days. So, he brought
them their two riding camels after three days and both of them (The
Prophet and Abu Bakr) set out accompanied by 'Amir bin Fuhaira and the Dili
guide who guided them below Mecca along the road leading to the seashore.

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 465:
Narrated Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr hired a man from the
tribe of Bani-Ad-Dil as an expert guide who was a pagan (follower of the
religion of the pagans of Quraish). The Prophet and Abu Bakr gave him their
two riding camels and took a promise from him to bring their riding camels
in the morning of the third day to the Cave of Thaur.

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 466:
Narrated Ya'la bin Umaya:
I fought in Jaish-al-Usra (Ghazwa of Tabuk) along with the Prophet and in
my opinion that was the best of my deeds. Then I had an employee, who
quarrel led with someone and one of the them bit and cut the other's finger
and caused his own tooth to fall out. He then went to the Prophet (with a
complaint) but the Prophet cancelled the suit and said to the complainant,
"Did you expect him to let his finger in your mouth so that you might snap
and cut it (as does a stallion camel)?"
Narrated Ibn Juraij from Abdullah bin Abu Mulaika from his grandfather a
similar story: A man bit the hand of another man and caused his own tooth
to fall out, but Abu Bakr judged that he had no right for compensation (for
the broken tooth).

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 467:
Narrated Ubai bin Ka'b:
Allah's Apostle said, "Both of them (Moses and Al-Khadir) proceeded on till
they reached a wall which was about to fall." Sa'd said, "(Al-Khadir pointed)
with his hands (towards the wall) and then raised his hands and the wall
became straightened up." Ya'la said, "I think Said said, 'He (Khadir) passed
his hand over it and it was straightened up." (Moses said to him), "if you had
wanted, you could have taken wages for it." Said said, "Wages with which to
buy food . "

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 468:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "Your example and the example of the people of the two
Scriptures (i.e. Jews and Christians) is like the example of a man who
employed some laborers and asked them, 'Who will work for me from
morning till midday for one Qirat?' The Jews accepted and carried out the
work. He then asked, Who will work for me from midday up to the 'Asr
prayer for one Qirat?' The Christians accepted and fulfilled the work. He then
said, 'Who will work for me from the 'Asr till sunset for two Qirats?' You,
Muslims have accepted the offer. The Jews and the Christians got angry and
said, 'Why should we work more and get lesser wages?' (Allah) said, 'Have I
with-held part of your right?' They replied in the negative. He said, 'It is My
Blessing, I bestow upon whomever I wish .'

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 469:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:
Allah's Apostle said, "Your example and the example of Jews and Christians
is like the example of a man who employed some laborers to whom he said,
'Who will work for me up to midday for one Qirat each?' The Jews carried
out the work for one Qirat each; and then the Christians carried out the
work up to the 'Asr prayer for one Qirat each; and now you Muslims are
working from the 'Asr prayer up to sunset for two Qirats each. The Jews and
Christians got angry and said, 'We work more and are paid less.' The
employer (Allah) asked them, 'Have I usurped some of your right?' They
replied in the negative. He said, 'That is My Blessing, I bestow upon
whomever I wish.' "

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 470:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah said, 'I will be an opponent to three types of people
on the Day of Resurrection:
1. One who makes a covenant in My Name, but proves treacherous;
2. One who sells a free person and eats his price; and
3. One who employs a laborer and takes full work from him but does not pay
him for his lab our.' "

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 471:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "The example of Muslims, Jews and Christians is like the
example of a man who employed laborers to work for him from morning till
night for specific wages. They worked till midday and then said, 'We do not
need your money which you have fixed for us and let whatever we have
done be annulled.' The man said to them, 'Don't quit the work, but
complete the rest of it and take your full wages.' But they refused and went
away. The man employed another batch after them and said to them,
'Complete the rest of the day and yours will be the wages I had fixed for the
first batch.' So, they worked till the time of 'Asr prayer. Then they said, "Let
what we have done be annulled and keep the wages you have promised us
for yourself.' The man said to them, 'Complete the rest of the work, as only
a little of the day remains,' but they refused. Thereafter he employed
another batch to work for the rest of the day and they worked for the rest
of the day till the sunset, and they received the wages of the two former
batches. So, that was the example of those people (Muslims) and the
example of this light (guidance) which they have accepted willingly.

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 472:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Three men from among those who were
before you, set out together till they reached a cave at night and entered it.
A big rock rolled down the mountain and closed the mouth of the cave. They
said (to each other), Nothing could save you Tom this rock but to invoke
Allah by giving referenda to the righteous deed which you have done (for
Allah's sake only).' So, one of them said, 'O Allah! I had old parents and I
never provided my family (wife, children etc.) with milk before them. One
day, by chance I was delayed, and I came late (at night) while they had slept.
I milked the sheep for them and took the milk to them, but I found them
sleeping. I disliked to provide my family with the milk before them. I waited
for them and the bowl of milk was in my hand and I kept on waiting for
them to get up till the day dawned. Then they got up and drank the milk. O
Allah! If I did that for Your Sake only, please relieve us from our critical
situation caused by this rock.' So, the rock shifted a little but they could not
get out."
The Prophet added, "The second man said, 'O Allah! I had a cousin who was
the dearest of all people to me and I wanted to have sexual relations with
her but she refused. Later she had a hard time in a famine year and she came
to me and I gave her one-hundred-and-twenty Dinars on the condition that
she would not resist my desire, and she agreed. When I was about to fulfill
my desire, she said: It is illegal for you to outrage my chastity except by
legitimate marriage. So, I thought it a sin to have sexual intercourse with her
and left her though she was the dearest of all the people to me, and also I
left the gold I had given her. O Allah! If I did that for Your Sake only, please
relieve us from the present calamity.' So, the rock shifted a little more but
still they could not get out from there."
The Prophet added, "Then the third man said, 'O Allah! I employed few
laborers and I paid them their wages with the exception of one man who did
not take his wages and went away. I invested his wages and I got much
property thereby. (Then after some time) he came and said to me: O Allah's
slave! Pay me my wages. I said to him: All the camels, cows, sheep and slaves
you see, are yours. He said: O Allah's slave! Don't mock at me. I said: I am not
mocking at you. So, he took all the herd and drove them away and left
nothing. O Allah! If I did that for Your Sake only, please relieve us from the
present suffering.' So, that rock shifted completely and they got out
walking.

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 473:
Narrated Abu May' id Al-Ansari:
Whenever Allah's Apostle ordered us to give in charity we would go to the
market and work as porters to earn a Mudd (two hand-fulls) (of foodstuff)
but now some of us have one-hundred thousand Dirhams or Diners. (The
sub-narrator) Shaqiq said, "I think Abu Mas'ud meant himself by saying
(some of us) .

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 474:
Narrated Tawus:
Ibn 'Abbas said, "The Prophet forbade the meeting of caravans (on the way)
and ordained that no townsman is permitted to sell things on behalf of a
bedouin." I asked Ibn 'Abbas, "What is the meaning of his saying, 'No
townsman is permitted to sell things on behalf of a bedouin.' " He replied,
"He should not work as a broker for him."

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 475:
Narrated Khabbab:
I was a blacksmith and did some work for Al-'As bin Wail. When he owed me
some money for my work, I went to him to ask for that amount. He said, "I
will not pay you unless you disbelieve in Muhammad." I said, "By Allah! I will
never do that till you die and be resurrected." He said, "Will I be dead and
then resurrected after my death?" I said, "Yes." He said, "There I will have
property and offspring and then I will pay you your due." Then Allah
revealed. 'Have you seen him who disbelieved in Our signs, and yet says: I
will be given property and offspring?' (19.77)

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 476:
Narrated Abu Said:
Some of the companions of the Prophet went on a journey till they reached
some of the 'Arab tribes (at night). They asked the latter to treat them as
their guests but they refused. The chief of that tribe was then bitten by a
snake (or stung by a scorpion) and they tried their best to cure him but in
vain. Some of them said (to the others), "Nothing has benefited him, will
you go to the people who resided here at night, it may be that some of them
might possess something (as treatment)," They went to the group of the
companions (of the Prophet ) and said, "Our chief has been bitten by a
snake (or stung by a scorpion) and we have tried everything but he has not
benefitted. Have you got anything (useful)?" One of them replied, "Yes, by
Allah! I can recite a Ruqya, but as you have refused to accept us as your
guests, I will not recite the Ruqya for you unless you fix for us some wages
for it." They agrees to pay them a flock of sheep. One of them then went
and recited (Suratul-Fatiha): 'All the praises are for the Lord of the Worlds'
and puffed over the chief who became all right as if he was released from a
chain, and got up and started walking, showing no signs of sickness.
They paid them what they agreed to pay. Some of them (i.e. the
companions) then suggested to divide their earnings among themselves,
but the one who performed the recitation said, "Do not divide them till we
go to the Prophet and narrate the whole story to him, and wait for his
order." So, they went to Allah's Apostle and narrated the story. Allah's
Apostle asked, "How did you come to know that Surat-ul-Fatiha was recited
as Ruqya?" Then he added, "You have done the right thing. Divide (what you
have earned) and assign a share for me as well." The Prophet smiled
thereupon.

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 477:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
When Abu Taiba cupped the Prophet and the Prophet ordered that he be
paid one or two Sas of foodstuff and he interceded with his masters to
reduce his taxes.

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 478:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
When the Prophet was cupped, he paid the man who cupped him his wages.

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 479:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
When the Prophet was cupped, he paid the man who cupped him his wages.
If it had been undesirable he would not have paid him.

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 480:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet used to get cupped and would never withhold the wages of
any person .

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 481:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet sent for a slave who had the profession of cupping, and he
cupped him. The Prophet ordered that he be paid one or two Sas, or one or
two Mudds of foodstuff, and appealed to his masters to reduce his taxes:

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 482:
Narrated Abu Masud Al-Ansari:
Allah's Apostle regarded illegal the price of a dog, the earnings of a
prostitute, and the charges taken by a soothsayer.

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 483:
Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet prohibited the earnings of slave girls
(through prostitution).

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 484:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet forbade taking a price for animal copulation.

Volume 3, Book 36, Number 485:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
"Allah's Apostle gave the land of Khaibar to the Jews to work on and
cultivate and take half of its yield. Ibn 'Umar added, "The land used to be
rented for a certain portion (of its yield)." Nafi mentioned the amount of the
portion but I forgot it. Rafi' bin Khadij said, "The Prophet forbade renting
farms." Narrated 'Ubaid-Ullah Nafi' said: Ibn 'Umar said: (The contract of
Khaibar continued) till 'Umar evacuated the Jews (from Khaibar).


BOOK 37. TRANSFERANCE OF A DEBT FROM ONE PERSON TO ANOTHER (AL-HAWAALA) (486-495)
Volume 3, Book 37, Number 486:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Procrastination (delay) in paying debts by a wealthy man
is injustice. So, if your debt is transferred from your debtor to a rich debtor,
you should agree."

Volume 3, Book 37, Number 487:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Procrastination (delay) in paying debts by a wealthy
person is injustice. So, if your debt is transferred from your debtor to a rich
debtor, you should agree."

Volume 3, Book 37, Number 488r:
Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa:
Once, while we were sitting in the company of Prophet, a dead man was
brought. The Prophet was requested to lead the funeral prayer for the
deceased. He said, "Is he in debt?" The people replied in the negative. He
said, "Has he left any wealth?" They said, "No." So, he led his funeral prayer.
Another dead man was brought and the people said, "O Allah's Apostle!
Lead his funeral prayer." The Prophet said, "Is he in debt?" They said, "Yes."
He said, "Has he left any wealth?" They said, ''Three Dinars." So, he led the
prayer. Then a third dead man was brought and the people said (to the
Prophet ), Please lead his funeral prayer." He said, "Has he left any wealth?"
They said, "No." He asked, "Is he in debt?" They said, ("Yes! He has to pay)
three Diners.', He (refused to pray and) said, "Then pray for your (dead)
companion." Abu Qatada said, "O Allah's Apostle! Lead his funeral prayer,
and I will pay his debt." So, he led the prayer.

Volume 3, Book 37, Number 488h:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "An Israeli man asked another Israeli to lend him one
thousand Dinars. The second man required witnesses. The former replied,
'Allah is sufficient as a witness.' The second said, 'I want a surety.' The
former replied, 'Allah is sufficient as a surety.' The second said, 'You are
right,' and lent him the money for a certain period. The debtor went across
the sea. When he finished his job, he searched for a conveyance so that he
might reach in time for the repayment of the debt, but he could not find
any. So, he took a piece of wood and made a hole in it, inserted in it one
thousand Dinars and a letter to the lender and then closed (i.e. sealed) the
hole tightly. He took the piece of wood to the sea and said. 'O Allah! You
know well that I took a loan of one thousand Dinars from so-and-so. He
demanded a surety from me but I told him that Allah's Guarantee was
sufficient and he accepted Your guarantee. He then asked for a witness and
I told him that Allah was sufficient as a Witness, and he accepted You as a
Witness. No doubt, I tried hard to find a conveyance so that I could pay his
money but could not find, so I hand over this money to You.' Saying that, he
threw the piece of wood into the sea till it went out far into it, and then he
went away. Meanwhile he started searching for a conveyance in order to
reach the creditor's country.
One day the lender came out of his house to see whether a ship had arrived
bringing his money, and all of a sudden he saw the piece of wood in which
his money had been deposited. He took it home to use for fire. When he
sawed it, he found his money and the letter inside it. Shortly after that, the
debtor came bringing one thousand Dinars to him and said, 'By Allah, I had
been trying hard to get a boat so that I could bring you your money, but
failed to get one before the one I have come by.' The lender asked, 'Have
you sent something to me?' The debtor replied, 'I have told you I could not
get a boat other than the one I have come by.' The lender said, 'Allah has
delivered on your behalf the money you sent in the piece of wood. So, you
may keep your one thousand Dinars and depart guided on the right path.' "

Volume 3, Book 37, Number 489:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
Ibn Abbas said, "In the verse: To every one We have appointed ' (Muwaliya
Mawaliya means one's) heirs (4.33).' (And regarding the verse) 'And those
with whom your right hands have made a pledge.' Ibn 'Abbas said, "When
the emigrants came to the Prophet in Medina, the emigrant would inherit
the Ansari while the latter's relatives would not inherit him because of the
bond of brotherhood which the Prophet established between them (i.e. the
emigrants and the Ansar). When the verse: 'And to everyone We have
appointed heirs' (4.33) was revealed, it cancelled (the bond (the pledge) of
brotherhood regarding inheritance)." Then he said, "The verse: To those
also to whom your right hands have pledged, remained valid regarding cooperation and mutual advice, while the matter of inheritance was excluded
and it became permissible to assign something in one's testament to the
person who had the right of inheriting before.

Volume 3, Book 37, Number 490:
Narrated Anas:
Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf came to us and Allah's Apostle established a bond of
brotherhood between him and Sad bin Rabi'a.

Volume 3, Book 37, Number 491:
Narrated Asim:
I heard Anas bin Malik, "Have you ever heard that the Prophet said, 'There is
no alliance in Islam?' " He replied, "The Prophet made alliance between
Quarish and the Ansar in my house."
Volume 3, Book 37, Number 492:
Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa:
A dead person was brought to the Prophet so that he might lead the funeral
prayer for him. He asked, "Is he in debt?" When the people replied in the
negative, he led the funeral prayer. Another dead person was brought and
he asked, "Is he in debt?" They said, "Yes." He (refused to lead the prayer
and) said, "Lead the prayer of your friend." Abu Qatada said, "O Allah's
Apostle! I undertake to pay his debt." Allah's Apostle then led his funeral
prayer.

Volume 3, Book 37, Number 493:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Once the Prophet said (to me), "If the money of Bahrain comes, I will give
you a certain amount of it." The Prophet had breathed his last before the
money of Bahrain arrived. When the money of Bahrain reached, Abu Bakr
announced, "Whoever was promised by the Prophet should come to us." I
went to Abu Bakr and said, "The Prophet promised me so and so." Abu Bakr
gave me a handful of coins and when I counted them, they were fivehundred in number. Abu Bakr then said, "Take twice the amount you have
taken (besides)."

Volume 3, Book 37, Number 494:
Narrated Aisha:
(wife of the Prophet) Since I reached the age when I could remember
things, I have seen my parents worshipping according to the right faith of
Islam. Not a single day passed but Allah's Apostle visited us both in the
morning and in the evening. When the Muslims were persecuted, Abu Bakr
set out for Ethiopia as an emigrant. When he reached a place called Bark-alGhimad, he met Ibn Ad-Daghna, the chief of the Qara tribe, who asked Abu
Bakr, "Where are you going?" Abu Bakr said, "My people have turned me
out of the country and I would like to tour the world and worship my Lord."
Ibn Ad-Daghna said, "A man like you will not go out, nor will he be turned
out as you help the poor earn their living, keep good relation with your Kith
and kin, help the disabled (or the dependents), provide guests with food
and shelter, and help people during their troubles. I am your protector. So,
go back and worship your Lord at your home." Ibn Ad-Daghna went along
with Abu Bakr and took him to the chiefs of Quraish saying to them, "A man
like Abu Bakr will not go out, nor will he be turned out. Do you turn out a
man who helps the poor earn their living, keeps good relations with Kith and
kin, helps the disabled, provides guests with food and shelter, and helps the
people during their troubles?"
So, Quraish allowed Ibn Ad-Daghna's guarantee of protection and told AbuBakr that he was secure, and said to Ibn Ad-Daghna, "Advise Abu Bakr to
worship his Lord in his house and to pray and read what he liked and not to
hurt us and not to do these things publicly, for we fear that our sons and
women may follow him." Ibn Ad-Daghna told Abu Bakr of all that, so AbuBakr continued worshipping his Lord in his house and did not pray or recite
Qur'an aloud except in his house. Later on Abu Bakr had an idea of building
a mosque in the court yard of his house. He fulfilled that idea and started
praying and reciting Qur'an there publicly. The women and the offspring of
the pagans started gathering around him and looking at him astonishingly.
Abu Bakr was a softhearted person and could not help weeping while
reciting Qur'an. This horrified the pagan chiefs of Quraish. They sent for Ibn
Ad-Daghna and when he came, they said, "We have given Abu Bakr
protection on condition that he will worship his Lord in his house, but he has
transgressed that condition and has built a mosque in the court yard of his
house and offered his prayer and recited Qur'an in public. We are afraid lest
he mislead our women and offspring. So, go to him and tell him that if he
wishes he can worship his Lord in his house only, and if not, then tell him to
return your pledge of protection as we do not like to betray you by revoking
your pledge, nor can we tolerate Abu Bakr's public declaration of Islam (his
worshipping)."
'Aisha added: Ibn Ad-Daghna came to Abu Bakr and said, "You know the
conditions on which I gave you protection, so you should either abide by
those conditions or revoke my protection, as I do not like to hear the 'Arabs
saying that Ibn Ad-Daghna gave the pledge of protection to a person and his
people did not respect it." Abu Bakr said, "I revoke your pledge of
protection and am satisfied with Allah's protection." At that time Allah's
Apostle was still in Mecca and he said to his companions, "Your place of
emigration has been shown to me. I have seen salty land, planted with datepalms and situated between two mountains which are the two ,Harras." So,
when the Prophet told it, some of the companions migrated to Medina, and
some of those who had migrated to Ethiopia returned to Medina. When Abu
Bakr prepared for emigration, Allah's Apostle said to him, "Wait, for I expect
to be permitted to emigrate." Abu Bakr asked, "May my father be sacrificed
for your sake, do you really expect that?" Allah's Apostle replied in the
affirmative. So, Abu Bakr postponed his departure in order to accompany
Allah's Apostle and fed two camels which he had, with the leaves of Samor
trees for four months.

Volume 3, Book 37, Number 495:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Whenever a dead man in debt was brought to Allah's Apostle he would ask,
"Has he left anything to repay his debt?" If he was informed that he had left
something to repay his debts, he would offer his funeral prayer, otherwise
he would tell the Muslims to offer their friend's funeral prayer. When Allah
made the Prophet wealthy through conquests, he said, "I am more rightful
than other believers to be the guardian of the believers, so if a Muslim dies
while in debt, I am responsible for the repayment of his debt, and whoever
leaves wealth (after his death) it will belong to his heirs. "
BOOK 38. REPRESENTATION, AUTHORIZATION, BUSINESS BY PROXY (496-512)
Volume 3, Book 38, Number 496:
Narrated 'Ali: Allah's Apostle ordered me to distribute the saddles and skins
of the Budn which had slaughtered.

Volume 3, Book 38, Number 497:
Narrated 'Uqba bin Amir:
that the Prophet had given him sheep to distribute among his companions
and a male kid was left (after the distribution). When he informed the
Prophet of it, he said (to him), "Offer it as a sacrifice on your behalf."

Volume 3, Book 38, Number 498:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf:
I got an agreement written between me and Umaiya bin Khalaf that Umaiya
would look after my property (or family) in Mecca and I would look after his
in Medina. When I mentioned the word 'Ar-Rahman' in the documents,
Umaiya said, "I do not know 'Ar-Rahman.' Write down to me your name,
(with which you called yourself) in the Pre-lslamic Period of Ignorance." So, I
wrote my name ' 'Abdu 'Amr'. On the day (of the battle) of Badr, when all
the people went to sleep, I went up the hill to protect him. Bilal(1) saw him
(i.e. Umaiya) and went to a gathering of Ansar and said, "(Here is) Umaiya
bin Khalaf! Woe to me if he escapes!" So, a group of Ansar went out with
Bilal to follow us ('Abdur-Rahman and Umaiya). Being afraid that they would
catch us, I left Umaiya's son for them to keep them busy but the Ansar killed
the son and insisted on following us. Umaiya was a fat man, and when they
approached us, I told him to kneel down, and he knelt, and I laid myself on
him to protect him, but the Ansar killed him by passing their swords
underneath me, and one of them injured my foot with his sword. (The sub
narrator said, " 'Abdur-Rahman used to show us the trace of the wound on
the back of his foot.")

Volume 3, Book 38, Number 499:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri and Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle employed someone as a governor at Khaibar. When the man
came to Medina, he brought with him dates called Janib. The Prophet asked
him, "Are all the dates of Khaibar of this kind?" The man replied, "(No), we
exchange two Sa's of bad dates for one Sa of this kind of dates (i.e. Janib),
or exchange three Sa's for two." On that, the Prophet said, "Don't do so, as
it is a kind of usury (Riba) but sell the dates of inferior quality for money, and
then buy Janib with the money". The Prophet said the same thing about
dates sold by weight. (See Hadith No. 506).

Volume 3, Book 38, Number 500:
Narrated Ibn Ka'b bin Malik from his father:
We had some sheep which used to graze at Sala'. One of our slavegirls saw a
sheep dying and she broke a stone and slaughtered the sheep with it. My
father said to the people, "Don't eat it till I ask the Prophet about it (or till I
send somebody to ask the Prophet)." So, he asked or sent somebody to ask
the Prophet, and the Prophet permitted him to eat it. 'Ubaidullah (a subnarrator) said, "I admire that girl, for though she was a slave-girl, she dared
to slaughter the sheep . "

Volume 3, Book 38, Number 501:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet owed somebody a camel of a certain age. When he came to
demand it back, the Prophet said (to some people), "Give him (his due)."
When the people searched for a camel of that age, they found none, but
found a camel one year older. The Prophet said, "Give (it to) him." On that,
the man remarked, "You have given me my right in full. May Allah give you in
full." The Prophet said, "The best amongst you is the one who pays the
rights of others generously."

Volume 3, Book 38, Number 502:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man came to the Prophet demanding his debts and behaved rudely. The
companions of the Prophet intended to harm him, but Allah's Apostle said
(to them), "Leave him, for the creditor (i.e. owner of a right) has the right to
speak." Allah's Apostle then said, "Give him a camel of the same age as that
of his." The people said, "O Allah's Apostle! There is only a camel that is
older than his." Allah's Apostle said, "Give (it to) him, for the best amongst
you is he who pays the rights of others handsomely."

Volume 3, Book 38, Number 503:
Narrated Marwan bin Al-Hakam and Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:
When the delegates of the tribe of Hawazin after embracing Islam, came to
Allah's Apostle, he got up. They appealed to him to return their properties
and their captives. Allah's Apostle said to them, "The most beloved
statement to me is the true one. So, you have the option of restoring your
properties or your captives, for I have delayed distributing them." The
narrator added, Allah's Apostle c had been waiting for them for more than
ten days on his return from Taif. When they realized that Allah's Apostle
would return to them only one of two things, they said, "We choose our
captives." So, Allah's Apostle got up in the gathering of the Muslims, praised
Allah as He deserved, and said, "Then after! These brethren of yours have
come to you with repentance and I see it proper to return their captives to
them. So, whoever amongst you likes to do that as a favor, then he can do
it, and whoever of you wants to stick to his share till we pay him from the
very first booty which Allah will give us then he can do so." The people
replied, "We agree to give up our shares willingly as a favor for Allah's
Apostle." Then Allah's Apostle said, "We don't know who amongst you has
agreed and who hasn't. Go back and your chiefs may tell us your opinion."
So, all of them returned and their chiefs discussed the matter with them and
then they (i.e. their chiefs) came to Allah's Apostle to tell him that they (i.e.
the people) had given up their shares gladly and willingly.

Volume 3, Book 38, Number 504:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
I was accompanying the Prophet on a journey and was riding a slow camel
that was lagging behind the others. The Prophet passed by me and asked,
"Who is this?" I replied, "Jabir bin 'Abdullah." He asked, "What is the matter,
(why are you late)?" I replied, "I am riding a slow camel." He asked, "Do you
have a stick?" I replied in the affirmative. He said, "Give it to me." When I
gave it to him, he beat the camel and rebuked it. Then that camel surpassed
the others thenceforth. The Prophet said, "Sell it to me." I replied, "It is (a
gift) for you, O Allah's Apostle." He said, "Sell it to me. I have bought it for
four Dinars (gold pieces) and you can keep on riding it till Medina." When we
approached Medina, I started going (towards my house). The Prophet said,
"Where are you going?" I Sad, "I have married a widow." He said, "Why have
you not married a virgin to fondle with each other?" I said, "My father died
and left daughters, so I decided to marry a widow (an experienced woman)
(to look after them)." He said, "Well done." When we reached Medina,
Allah's Apostle said, "O Bilal, pay him (the price of the camel) and give him
extra money." Bilal gave me four Dinars and one Qirat extra. (A sub-narrator
said): Jabir added, "The extra Qirat of Allah's Apostle never parted from
me." The Qirat was always in Jabir bin 'Abdullah's purse.

Volume 3, Book 38, Number 505r:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
A woman came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I want to give
up myself to you." A man said, "Marry her to me." The Prophet said, "We
agree to marry her to you with what you know of the Qur'an by heart."

Volume 3, Book 38, Number 505t:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle deputed me to keep Sadaqat (al-Fitr) of Ramadan. A comer
came and started taking handfuls of the foodstuff (of the Sadaqa)
(stealthily). I took hold of him and said, "By Allah, I will take you to Allah's
Apostle ." He said, "I am needy and have many dependents, and I am in
great need." I released him, and in the morning Allah's Apostle asked me,
"What did your prisoner do yesterday?" I said, "O Allah's Apostle! The
person complained of being needy and of having many dependents, so, I
pitied him and let him go." Allah's Apostle said, "Indeed, he told you a lie
and he will be coming again." I believed that he would show up again as
Allah's Apostle had told me that he would return. So, I waited for him
watchfully. When he (showed up and) started stealing handfuls of
foodstuff, I caught hold of him again and said, "I will definitely take you to
Allah's Apostle. He said, "Leave me, for I am very needy and have many
dependents. I promise I will not come back again." I pitied him and let him
go.
In the morning Allah's Apostle asked me, "What did your prisoner do." I
replied, "O Allah's Apostle! He complained of his great need and of too
many dependents, so I took pity on him and set him free." Allah's Apostle
said, "Verily, he told you a lie and he will return." I waited for him attentively
for the third time, and when he (came and) started stealing handfuls of the
foodstuff, I caught hold of him and said, "I will surely take you to Allah's
Apostle as it is the third time you promise not to return, yet you break your
promise and come." He said, "(Forgive me and) I will teach you some words
with which Allah will benefit you." I asked, "What are they?" He replied,
"Whenever you go to bed, recite "Ayat-al-Kursi"-- 'Allahu la ilaha illa huwa-lHaiy-ul Qaiyum' till you finish the whole verse. (If you do so), Allah will
appoint a guard for you who will stay with you and no satan will come near
you till morning. " So, I released him. In the morning, Allah's Apostle asked,
"What did your prisoner do yesterday?" I replied, "He claimed that he would
teach me some words by which Allah will benefit me, so I let him go." Allah's
Apostle asked, "What are they?" I replied, "He said to me, 'Whenever you go
to bed, recite Ayat-al-Kursi from the beginning to the end ---- Allahu la ilaha
illa huwa-lHaiy-ul-Qaiyum----.' He further said to me, '(If you do so), Allah will
appoint a guard for you who will stay with you, and no satan will come near
you till morning.' (Abu Huraira or another sub-narrator) added that they (the
companions) were very keen to do good deeds. The Prophet said, "He really
spoke the truth, although he is an absolute liar. Do you know whom you
were talking to, these three nights, O Abu Huraira?" Abu Huraira said, "No."
He said, "It was Satan."

Volume 3, Book 38, Number 506:
Narrated Abu Said al-Khudri:
Once Bilal brought Barni (i.e. a kind of dates) to the Prophet and the
Prophet asked him, "From where have you brought these?" Bilal replied, "I
had some inferior type of dates and exchanged two Sas of it for one Sa of
Barni dates in order to give it to the Prophet; to eat." Thereupon the
Prophet said, "Beware! Beware! This is definitely Riba (usury)! This is
definitely Riba (Usury)! Don't do so, but if you want to buy (a superior kind
of dates) sell the inferior dates for money and then buy the superior kind of
dates with that money."

Volume 3, Book 38, Number 507:
Narrated 'Amr:
Concerning the Waqf of 'Umar: It was not sinful of the trustee (of the Waqf)
to eat or provide his friends from it, provided the trustee had no intention of
collecting fortune (for himself). Ibn 'Umar was the manager of the trust of
'Umar and he used to give presents from it to those with whom he used to
stay at Mecca.
Volume 3, Book 38, Number 508:
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid and Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "O Unais! Go to the wife of this (man) and if she confesses
(that she has committed illegal sexual intercourse), then stone her to
death."

Volume 3, Book 38, Number 509:
Narrated 'Uqba bin Al-Harith:
When An-Nuaman or his son was brought in a state of drunkenness, Allah's
Apostle ordered all those who were present in the house to beat him. I was
one of those who beat him. We beat him with shoes and palm-leaf stalks.

Volume 3, Book 38, Number 510:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I twisted the garlands of the Hadis (i.e. animals for sacrifice) of Allah's
Apostle with my own hands. Then Allah's Apostle put them around their
necks with his own hands, and sent them with my father (to Mecca).
Nothing legal was regarded illegal for Allah's Apostle till the animals were
slaughtered.

Volume 3, Book 38, Number 511:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Abu Talha was the richest man in Medina amongst the Ansar and Beeruha'
(garden) was the most beloved of his property, and it was situated opposite
the mosque (of the Prophet.). Allah's Apostle used to enter it and drink from
its sweet water. When the following Divine Verse were revealed: 'you will
not attain righteousness till you spend in charity of the things you love
(3.93), Abu Talha got up in front of Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Allah says in His Book, 'You will not attain righteousness unless you
spend (in charity) that which you love,' and verily, the most beloved to me
of my property is Beeruha (garden), so I give it in charity and hope for its
reward from Allah. O Allah's Apostle! Spend it wherever you like." Allah's
Apostle appreciated that and said, "That is perishable wealth, that is
perishable wealth. I have heard what you have said; I suggest you to
distribute it among your relatives." Abu Talha said, "I will do so, O Allah's
Apostle." So, Abu Talha distributed it among his relatives and cousins. The
sub-narrator (Malik) said: The Prophet said: "That is a profitable wealth,"
instead of "perishable wealth".

Volume 3, Book 38, Number 512:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "An honest treasurer who gives what he is ordered to give
fully, perfectly and willingly to the person to whom he is ordered to give, is
regarded as one of the two charitable persons."
BOOK 39. AGRICULTURE (513-540)
Volume 3, Book 39, Number 513:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "There is none amongst the Muslims who plants a tree
or sows seeds, and then a bird, or a person or an animal eats from it, but is
regarded as a charitable gift for him."

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 514:
Narrated Abu Umama al-Bahili:
I saw some agricultural equipments and said: "I heard the Prophet saying:
"There is no house in which these equipment enters except that Allah will
cause humiliation to enter it."

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 515:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever keeps a dog, one Qirat of the reward of his
good deeds is deducted daily, unless the dog is used for guarding a farm or
cattle." Abu Huraira (in another narration) said from the Prophet, "unless it
is used for guarding sheep or farms, or for hunting." Narrated Abu Hazim
from Abu Huraira: The Prophet said, "A dog for guarding cattle or for
hunting."

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 516:
Narrated As-Sa'ib bin Yazid:
Abu Sufyan bin Abu Zuhair, a man from Azd Shanu'a and one of the
companions of the Prophet said, "I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'If one
keeps a dog which is meant for guarding neither a farm nor cattle, one Qirat
of the reward of his good deeds is deducted daily." I said, "Did you hear this
from Allah's Apostle?" He said, "Yes, by the Lord of this Mosque."

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 517:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "While a man was riding a cow, it turned towards him and
said, 'I have not been created for this purpose (i.e. carrying), I have been
created for sloughing." The Prophet added, "I, Abu Bakr and 'Umar believe
in the story." The Prophet went on, "A wolf caught a sheep, and when the
shepherd chased it, the wolf said, 'Who will be its guard on the day of wild
beasts, when there will be no shepherd for it except me?' "After narrating it,
the Prophet said, "I, Abu Bakr and 'Umar too believe it." Abu Salama (a subnarrator) said, "Abu Bakr and 'Umar were not present then." (It has been
written that a wolf also spoke to one of the companions of the Prophet near
Medina as narrated in Fatah-al-Bari:
Narrated Unais bin 'Amr: Ahban bin Aus said, "I was amongst my sheep.
Suddenly a wolf caught a sheep and I shouted at it. The wolf sat on its tail
and addressed me, saying, 'Who will look after it (i.e. the sheep) when you
will be busy and not able to look after it? Do you forbid me the provision
which Allah has provided me?' " Ahban added, "I clapped my hands and said,
'By Allah, I have never seen anything more curious and wonderful than this!'
On that the wolf said, 'There is something (more curious) and wonderful
than this; that is, Allah's Apostle in those palm trees, inviting people to Allah
(i.e. Islam).' "Unais bin 'Amr further said, "Then Ahban went to Allah's
Apostle and informed him what happened and embraced Islam.)" palm
trees or other trees and share the fruits with me."

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 518:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Ansar said to the Prophet "Distribute the date palm trees between us
and our emigrant brothers." He replied, "No." The Ansar said (to the
emigrants), "Look after the trees (water and watch them) and share the
fruits with us." The emigrants said, "We listen and obey."

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 519:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet got the date palm trees of the tribe of Bani-An-Nadir burnt and
the trees cut down at a place called Al-Buwaira . Hassan bin Thabit said in a
poetic verse: "The chiefs of Bani Lu'ai found it easy to watch fire spreading
at Al-Buwaira."

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 520:
Narrated Rafi' bin Khadij:
We worked on farms more than anybody else in Medina. We used to rent
the land at the yield of specific delimited portion of it to be given to the
landlord. Sometimes the vegetation of that portion was affected by blights
etc., while the rest remained safe and vice versa, so the Prophet forbade this
practice. At that time gold or silver were not used (for renting the land). If
they provided the seeds, they would get so-and-so much. Al-Hasan said,
"There is no harm if the land belongs to one but both spend on it and the
yield is divided between them." Az-Zuhri had the same opinion. Al-Hasan
said, "There is no harm if cotton is picked on the condition of having half the
yield." Ibrahim, Ibn Siain, 'Ata', Al-Hakam, Az-Zuhri and Qatada said, "There
is no harm in giving the yarn to the weaver to weave into cloth on the basis
that one-third or one-fourth (or any other portion) of the cloth is given to
the weaver for his labor." Ma'am said, "There is no harm in hiring animals for
a definite (fixed) period on the basis that one-third or one-fourth of the
products carried by the animals is given to the owner of the animals."
Volume 3, Book 39, Number 521:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
The Prophet concluded a contract with the people of Khaibar to utilize the
land on the condition that half the products of fruits or vegetation would be
their share. The Prophet used to give his wives one hundred Wasqs each,
eighty Wasqs of dates and twenty Wasqs of barley. (When 'Umar became
the Caliph) he gave the wives of the Prophet the option of either having the
land and water as their shares, or carrying on the previous practice. Some of
them chose the land and some chose the Wasqs, and 'Aisha chose the land.

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 522:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet made a deal with the people of Khaibar that they would have
half the fruits and vegetation of the land they cultivated.

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 523:
Narrated 'Amr:
I said to Tawus, "I wish you would give up Mukhabara (Share-cropping), for
the people say that the Prophet forbade it." On that Tawus replied, "O 'Amr!
I give the land to share-croppers and help them. No doubt; the most learned
man, namely Ibn 'Abbas told me that the Prophet had not forbidden it but
said, 'It is more beneficial for one to give his land free to one's brother than
to charge him a fixed rental."

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 524:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle gave the land of Khaibar to the Jew's on the condition that
they work on it and cultivate it, and be given half of its yield.
Volume 3, Book 39, Number 525:
Narrated Rafi:
We worked on farms more than anybody else in Medina. We used to rent
the land and say to the owner, "The yield of this portion is for us and the
yield of that portion is for you (as the rent)." One of those portions might
yield something and the other might not. So, the Prophet forbade us to do
so.

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 526:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "While three men were walking, It started raining and
they took shelter (refuge) in a cave in a mountain. A big rock rolled down
from the mountain and closed the mouth of the cave. They said to each
other, "Think of good deeds which you did for Allah's sake only, and invoke
Allah by giving reference to those deeds so that He may remove this rock
from you." One of them said, 'O Allah! I had old parents and small children
and I used to graze the sheep for them. On my return to them in the
evening, I used to milk (the sheep) and start providing my parents first of all
before my children. One day I was delayed and came late at night and found
my parents sleeping. I milked (the sheep) as usual and stood by their heads.
I hated to wake them up and disliked to give milk to my children before
them, although my children were weeping (because of hunger) at my feet
till the day dawned. O Allah! If I did this for Your sake only, kindly remove
the rock so that we could see the sky through it.' So, Allah removed the rock
a little and they saw the sky. The second man said, 'O Allah! I was in love
with a cousin of mine like the deepest love a man may have for a woman. I
wanted to outrage her chastity but she refused unless I gave her one
hundred Dinars. So, I struggled to collect that amount. And when I sat
between her legs, she said, 'O Allah's slave! Be afraid of Allah and do not
deflower me except rightfully (by marriage).' So, I got up. O Allah! If I did it
for Your sake only, please remove the rock.' The rock shifted a little more.
Then the third man said, 'O Allah! I employed a laborer for a Faraq of rice
and when he finished his job and demanded his right, I presented it to him,
but he refused to take it. So, I sowed the rice many time till I gathered cows
and their shepherd (from the yield). (Then after some time) He came and
said to me, 'Fear Allah (and give me my right)." I said, 'Go and take those
cows and the shepherd.' He said, 'Be afraid of Allah! Don't mock at me.' I
said, 'I am not mocking at you. Take (all that).' So, he took all that. O Allah! If
I did that for Your sake only, please remove the rest of the rock.' So, Allah
removed the rock."

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 527:
Narrated Zaid bin Aslam from his father:
Umar said, "But for the future Muslim generations, I would have distributed
the land of the villages I conquer among the soldiers as the Prophet
distributed the land of Khaibar."

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 528:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "He who cultivates land that does not belong to anybody
is more rightful (to own it)." 'Urwa said, "Umar gave the same verdict in his
Caliphate."

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 529:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
While the Prophet was passing the night at his place of rest in Dhul-Hulaifa in
the bottom of the valley (of Aqiq), he saw a dream and it was said to him,
"You are in a blessed valley." Musa said, "Salim let our camels kneel at the
place where 'Abdullah used to make his camel kneel, seeking the place
where Allah's Apostle used to take a rest, which is situated below the
mosque which is in the bottom of the valley; it is midway between the
mosque and the road."

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 530:
Narrated 'Umar:
While the Prophet was in Al-'Aqiq he said, "Someone (meaning Gabriel)
came to me from my Lord tonight (in my dream) and said, 'Offer the prayer
in this blessed valley and say (I intend to perform) Umra along with Hajj
(together).' "

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 531:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Umar expelled the Jews and the Christians from Hijaz. When Allah's Apostle
had conquered Khaibar, he wanted to expel the Jews from it as its land
became the property of Allah, His Apostle, and the Muslims. Allah's Apostle
intended to expel the Jews but they requested him to let them stay there on
the condition that they would do the labor and get half of the fruits. Allah's
Apostle told them, "We will let you stay on thus condition, as long as we
wish." So, they (i.e. Jews) kept on living there until 'Umar forced them to go
towards Taima' and Ariha'.

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 532:
Narrated Rafi bin Khadij:
My uncle Zuhair said, "Allah's Apostle forbade us to do a thing which was a
source of help to us." I said, "Whatever Allah's Apostle said was right." He
said, "Allah's Apostle sent for me and asked, 'What are you doing with your
farms?' I replied, 'We give our farms on rent on the basis that we get the
yield produced at the banks of the water streams (rivers) for the rent, or
rent it for some Wasqs of barley and dates.' Allah's Apostle said, 'Do not do
so, but cultivate (the land) yourselves or let it be cultivated by others gratis,
or keep it uncultivated.' I said, 'We hear and obey.'

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 533:
Narrated Jabir:
The people used to rent their land for cultivation for one-third, one-fourth or
half its yield. The Prophet said, "Whoever has land should cultivate it himself
or give it to his (Muslim) brother gratis; otherwise keep it uncultivated."
Narrated Abu Huraira: Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever has land should
cultivate it himself or give it to his (Muslim) brother gratis; otherwise he
should keep it uncultivated."

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 534:
Narrated 'Amr:
When I mentioned it (i.e. the narration of Rafi 'bin Khadij: no. 532) to Tawus,
he said, "It is permissible to rent the land for cultivation, for Ibn 'Abbas said,
'The Prophet did not forbid that, but said: One had better give the land to
one's brother gratis rather than charge a certain amount for it.' "

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 535:
Narrated Nafi:
Ibn 'Umar used to rent his farms in the time of Abu Bakr, 'Umar, 'Uthman,
and in the early days of Muawiya. Then he was told the narration of Rafi 'bin
Khadij that the Prophet had forbidden the renting of farms. Ibn 'Umar went
to Rafi' and I accompanied him. He asked Rafi who replied that the Prophet
had forbidden the renting of farms. Ibn 'Umar said, "You know that we used
to rent our farms in the life-time of Allah's Apostle for the yield of the banks
of the water streams (rivers) and for certain amount of figs.
Volume 3, Book 39, Number 536:
Narrated Salim:
Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "I knew that the land was rented for cultivation in
the life-time of Allah's Apostle ." Later on Ibn 'Umar was afraid that the
Prophet had forbidden it, and he had no knowledge of it, so he gave up
renting his land.

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 537:
Narrated Hanzla bin Qais:
Rafi bin Khadij said, "My two uncles told me that they (i.e. the companions
of the Prophet) used to rent the land in the life-time of the Prophet for the
yield on the banks of water streams (rivers) or for a portion of the yield
stipulated by the owner of the land. The Prophet forbade it." I said to Rafi,
"What about renting the land for Dinars and Dirhams?" He replied, "There is
no harm in renting for Dinars-Dirhams. Al-Laith said, "If those who have
discernment for distinguishing what is legal from what is illegal looked into
what has been forbidden concerning this matter they would not permit it,
for it is surrounded with dangers."

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 538:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Once the Prophet was narrating (a story), while a bedouin was sitting with
him. "One of the inhabitants of Paradise will ask Allah to allow him to
cultivate the land. Allah will ask him, 'Are you not living in the pleasures you
like?' He will say, 'Yes, but I like to cultivate the land.' " The Prophet added,
"When the man (will be permitted he) will sow the seeds and the plants will
grow up and get ripe, ready for reaping and so on till it will be as huge as
mountains within a wink. Allah will then say to him, 'O son of Adam! Take
here you are, gather (the yield); nothing satisfies you.' " On that, the
bedouin said, "The man must be either from Quraish (i.e. an emigrant) or an
Ansari, for they are farmers, whereas we are not farmers." The Prophet
smiled (at this).

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 539:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
We used to be very happy on Friday as an old lady used to cut some roots of
the Silq, which we used to plant on the banks of our small water streams,
and cook them in a pot of her's, adding to them, some grains of barley.
(Ya'qub, the sub-narrator said, "I think the narrator mentioned that the food
did not contain fat or melted fat (taken from meat).") When we offered the
Friday prayer we would go to her and she would serve us with the dish. So,
we used to be happy on Fridays because of that. We used not to take our
meals or the midday nap except after the Jumua prayer (i.e. Friday prayer) .

Volume 3, Book 39, Number 540:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The people say that Abu Huraira narrates too many narrations. In fact Allah
knows whether I say the truth or not. They also ask, "Why do the emigrants
and the Ansar not narrate as he does?" In fact, my emigrant brethren were
busy trading in the markets, and my Ansar brethren were busy with their
properties. I was a poor man keeping the company of Allah's Apostle and
was satisfied with what filled my stomach. So, I used to be present while
they (i.e. the emigrants and the Ansar) were absent, and I used to
remember while they forgot (the Hadith). One day the Prophet said,
"Whoever spreads his sheet till I finish this statement of mine and then
gathers it on his chest, will never forget anything of my statement." So, I
spread my covering sheet which was the only garment I had, till the Prophet
finished his statement and then I gathered it over my chest. By Him Who had
sent him (i.e. Allah's Apostle) with the truth, since then I did not forget even
a single word of that statement of his, until this day of mine. By Allah, but
for two verses in Allah's Book, I would never have related any narration
(from the Prophet). (These two verses are): "Verily! Those who conceal the
clear signs and the guidance which we have sent down .....(up to) the
Merciful.' (2.159-160)
BOOK 40. DISTRIBUTION OF WATER (541-569)
Volume 3, Book 40, Number 541:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
A tumbler (full of milk or water) was brought to the Prophet who drank
from it, while on his right side there was sitting a boy who was the youngest
of those who were present and on his left side there were old men. The
Prophet asked, "O boy, will you allow me to give it (i.e. the rest of the drink)
to the old men?" The boy said, "O Allah's Apostle! I will not give preference
to anyone over me to drink the rest of it from which you have drunk." So,
the Prophet gave it to him.

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 542:
Narrated Az-Zuhri:
Anas bin Malik said, that once a domestic sheep was milked for Allah's
Apostle while he was in the house of Anas bin Malik. The milk was mixed
with water drawn from the well in Anas's house. A tumbler of it was
presented to Allah's Apostle who drank from it. Then Abu Bakr was sitting
on his left side and a bedouin on his right side. When the Prophet removed
the tumbler from his mouth, 'Umar was afraid that the Prophet might give it
to the bedouin, so he said. "O Allah's Apostle! Give it to Abu Bakr who is
sitting by your side." But the Prophet gave it to the bedouin, who was to his
right and said, "You should start with the one on your right side."

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 543:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Do not withhold the superfluous water, for that will
prevent people from grazing their cattle."
Volume 3, Book 40, Number 544:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
that Allah's Apostle said, "Do not withhold the superfluous water in order to
withhold the superfluous grass."

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 545:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "No bloodmoney will be charged if somebody dies in a
mine or in a well or is killed by an animal; and if somebody finds a treasure in
his land he has to give one-fifth of it to the Government."

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 546:
Narrated 'Abdullah (bin Mas'ud):
The Prophet said, "Whoever takes a false oath to deprive somebody of his
property will meet Allah while He will be angry with him." Allah revealed:
'Verily those who purchase a little gain at the cost of Allah's covenant, and
their oaths.' ........(3.77)
Al-Ash'ath came (to the place where 'Abdullah was narrating) and said,
"What has Abu 'Abdur-Rahman (i.e. Abdullah) been telling you? This verse
was revealed concerning me. I had a well in the land of a cousin of mine. The
Prophet asked me to bring witnesses (to confirm my claim). I said, 'I don't
have witnesses.' He said, 'Let the defendant take an oath then.' I said, 'O
Allah's Apostle! He will take a (false) oath immediately.' Then the Prophet
mentioned the above narration and Allah revealed the verse to confirm
what he had said." (See Hadith No. 692)

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 547:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "There are three persons whom Allah will not look at on
the Day of Resurrection, nor will he purify them and theirs shall be a severe
punishment. They are:
1. A man possessed superfluous water, on a way and he withheld it from
travelers.
2. A man who gave a pledge of allegiance to a ruler and he gave it only for
worldly benefits. If the ruler gives him something he gets satisfied, and if the
ruler withholds something from him, he gets dissatisfied.
3. And man displayed his goods for sale after the 'Asr prayer and he said, 'By
Allah, except Whom None has the right to be worshipped, I have been given
so much for my goods,' and somebody believes him (and buys them)."
The Prophet then recited: "Verily! Those who purchase a little gain at the
cost of Allah's Covenant and their oaths." (3.77)

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 548:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair:
An Ansari man quarrelled with Az-Zubair in the presence of the Prophet
about the Harra Canals which were used for irrigating the date-palms. The
Ansari man said to Az-Zubair, "Let the water pass' but Az-Zubair refused to
do so. So, the case was brought before the Prophet who said to Az-Zubair,
"O Zubair! Irrigate (your land) and then let the water pass to your neighbor."
On that the Ansari got angry and said to the Prophet, "Is it because he (i.e.
Zubair) is your aunt's son?" On that the color of the face of Allah's Apostle
changed (because of anger) and he said, "O Zubair! Irrigate (your land) and
then withhold the water till it reaches the walls between the pits round the
trees." Zubair said, "By Allah, I think that the following verse was revealed
on this occasion": "But no, by your Lord They can have No faith Until they
make you judge In all disputes between them." (4.65)

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 549:
Narrated 'Urwa:
When a man from the Ansar quarrelled with AzZubair, the Prophet said, "O
Zubair! Irrigate (your land) first and then let the water flow (to the land of
the others)." "On that the Ansari said, (to the Prophet), "It is because he is
your aunt's son." On that the Prophet said, "O Zubair! Irrigate till the water
reaches the walls between the pits around the trees and then stop (i.e. let
the water go to the other's land)." I think the following verse was revealed
concerning this event: "But no, by your Lord They can have No faith Until
they make you judge In all disputes between them." (4.65)

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 550:
Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair:
An-Ansari man quarrelled with Az-Zubair about a canal in the Harra which
was used for irrigating date-palms. Allah's Apostle, ordering Zubair to be
moderate, said, "O Zubair! Irrigate (your land) first and then leave the water
for your neighbor." The Ansari said, "Is it because he is your aunt's son?" On
that the color of the face of Allah's Apostle changed and he said, "O Zubair!
Irrigate (your land) and withhold the water till it reaches the walls that are
between the pits around the trees." So, Allah's Apostle gave Zubair his full
right. Zubair said, "By Allah, the following verse was revealed in that
connection": "But no, by your Lord They can have No faith Until they make
you judge In all disputes between them." (4.65)
(The sub-narrator,) Ibn Shihab said to Juraij (another sub-narrator), "The
Ansar and the other people interpreted the saying of the Prophet, 'Irrigate
(your land) and with-hold the water till it reaches the walls between the pits
around the trees,' as meaning up to the ankles."

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 551:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "While a man was walking he felt thirsty and went
down a well and drank water from it. On coming out of it, he saw a dog
panting and eating mud because of excessive thirst. The man said, 'This
(dog) is suffering from the same problem as that of mine. So he (went down
the well), filled his shoe with water, caught hold of it with his teeth and
climbed up and watered the dog. Allah thanked him for his (good) deed and
forgave him." The people asked, "O Allah's Apostle! Is there a reward for us
in serving (the) animals?" He replied, "Yes, there is a reward for serving any
animate."

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 552:
Narrated Asma' bint Abi Bakr:
The Prophet prayed the eclipse prayer, and then said, "Hell was displayed so
close that I said, 'O my Lord ! Am I going to be one of its inhabitants?"'
Suddenly he saw a woman. I think he said, who was being scratched by a
cat. He said, "What is wrong with her?" He was told, "She had imprisoned it
(i.e. the cat) till it died of hunger."

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 553:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "A woman was tortured and was put in Hell because of
a cat which she had kept locked till it died of hunger." Allah's Apostle further
said, (Allah knows better) Allah said (to the woman), 'You neither fed it nor
watered when you locked it up, nor did you set it free to eat the insects of
the earth."

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 554:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
Once a tumbler (full of milk or water) was brought to Allah's Apostle who
drank from it, while on his right side there was sitting a boy who was the
youngest of those who were present, and on his left side there were old
men. The Prophet asked, "O boy ! Do you allow me to give (the drink) to the
elder people (first)?" The boy said, "I will not prefer anybody to have my
share from you, O Allah's Apostle!" So, he gave it to the boy.

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 555:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "By Him in Whose Hands my soul is, I will drive some
people out from my (sacred) Fount on the Day of Resurrection as strange
camels are expelled from a private trough."

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 556:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "May Allah be merciful to the mother of Ishmael! If she
had left the water of Zam-Zam (fountain) as it was, (without constructing a
basin for keeping the water), (or said, "If she had not taken handfuls of its
water"), it would have been a flowing stream. Jurhum (an Arab tribe) came
and asked her, 'May we settle at your dwelling?' She said, 'Yes, but you have
no right to possess the water.' They agreed."

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 557:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "There are three types of people whom Allah will neither
talk to, nor look at, on the Day of Resurrection. (They are):
1. A man who takes an oath falsely that he has been offered for his goods so
much more than what he is given,
2. a man who takes a false oath after the 'Asr prayer in order to grab a
Muslim's property, and
3. a man who with-holds his superfluous water. Allah will say to him, "Today
I will with-hold My Grace from you as you with-held the superfluity of what
you had not created."

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 558:
Narrated As-Sab bin Jaththama:
Allah's Apostle said, No Hima except for Allah and His Apostle. We have
been told that Allah's Apostle made a place called An-Naqi' as Hima, and
'Umar made Ash-Sharaf and Ar-Rabadha Hima (for grazing the animals of
Zakat).

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 559:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Keeping horses may be a source of reward to some
(man), a shelter to another (i.e. means of earning one's living), or a burden
to a third. He to whom the horse will be a source of reward is the one who
keeps it in Allah's Cause (prepare it for holy battles) and ties it by a long rope
in a pasture (or a garden). He will get a reward equal to what its long rope
allows it to eat in the pasture or the garden, and if that horse breaks its rope
and crosses one or two hills, then all its foot-steps and its dung will be
counted as good deeds for its owner; and if it passes by a river and drinks
from it, then that will also be regarded as a good deed for its owner even if
he has had no intention of watering it then. Horses are a shelter from
poverty to the second person who keeps horses for earning his living so as
not to ask others, and at the same time he gives Allah's right (i.e. Rakat)
(from the wealth he earns through using them in trading etc.,) and does not
overburden them. He who keeps horses just out of pride and for showing
off and as a means of harming the Muslims, his horses will be a source of
sins to him." When Allah's Apostle was asked about donkeys, he replied,
"Nothing particular was revealed to me regarding

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 560:
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid:
A man came to Allah's Apostle and asked about Al-Luqata (a fallen thing).
The Prophet said, "Recognize its container and its tying material and then
make a public announcement about it for one year and if its owner shows
up, give it to him; otherwise use it as you like." The man said, "What about a
lost sheep?" The Prophet said, "It is for you, your brother or the wolf." The
man said "What about a lost camel?" The Prophet said, "Why should you
take it as it has got its water-container (its stomach) and its hooves and it
can reach the places of water and can eat the trees till its owner finds it?"

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 561:
Narrated Az-Zubair bin Al 'Awwam:
The Prophet said, "No doubt, one had better take a rope (and cut) and tie a
bundle of wood and sell it whereby Allah will keep his face away (from Hellfire) rather than ask others who may give him or not."

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 562:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "No doubt, you had better gather a bundle of wood and
carry it on your back (and earn your living thereby) rather than ask
somebody who may give you or not."

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 563:
Narrated Husain bin Ali
Ali bin Abi Talib said: "I got a she-camel as my share of the war booty on the
day (of the battle) of Badr, and Allah's Apostle gave me another she-camel. I
let both of them kneel at the door of one of the Ansar, intending to carry
Idhkhir on them to sell it and use its price for my wedding banquet on
marrying Fatima. A goldsmith from Bam Qainqa' was with me. Hamza bin
'Abdul-Muttalib was in that house drinking wine and a lady singer was
reciting: "O Hamza! (Kill) the (two) fat old she camels (and serve them to
your guests)."
So Hamza took his sword and went towards the two she-camels and cut off
their humps and opened their flanks and took a part of their livers." (I said
to Ibn Shihab, "Did he take part of the humps?" He replied, "He cut off their
humps and carried them away.") 'Ali further said, "When I saw that dreadful
sight, I went to the Prophet and told him the news. The Prophet came out in
the company of Zaid bin Haritha who was with him then, and I too went
with them. He went to Hamza and spoke harshly to him. Hamza looked up
and said, 'Aren't you only the slaves of my forefathers?' The Prophet
retreated and went out. This incident happened before the prohibition of
drinking."

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 564:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet decided to grant a portion of (the uncultivated land of) Bahrain
to the Ansar. The Ansar said, "(We will not accept it) till you give a similar
portion to our emigrant brothers (from Quraish)." He said, "(O Ansar!) You
will soon see people giving preference to others, so remain patient till you
meet me (on the Day of Resurrection).

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 565:
Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet said, "One of the rights of a she camel is
that it should be milked at a place of water."
Volume 3, Book 40, Number 566:
Narrated Zaid bin Thabit:
The Prophet permitted selling the dates of the 'Araya for ready dates by
estimating the amount of the former (as they are still on the trees).

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 567:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet forbade the sales called Al-Mukhabara, Al-Muhaqala and AlMuzabana and the selling of fruits till they are free from blights. He forbade
the selling of the fruits except for money, except the 'Araya.

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 568:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet allowed the sale of the dates of the 'Araya for ready dates by
estimating the former which should be estimated as less than five Awsuq or
five Awsuq. (Dawud, the sub-narrator is not sure as to the right amount.)

Volume 3, Book 40, Number 569:
Narrated Rafi 'bin Khadij and Sahl bin Al Hathma:
Allah's Apostle forbade the sale of Muzabana, i.e. selling of fruits for fruits,
except in the case of 'Araya; he allowed the owners of 'Araya such kind of
sale.
BOOK 41. LOANS, PAYMENT OF LOANS, FREEZING OF PROPERTY, BANKRUPTCY (570-607)
Volume 3, Book 41, Number 570:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
While I was in the company of the Prophet in one of his Ghazawat, he asked,
"What is wrong with your camel? Will you sell it?" I replied in the affirmative
and sold it to him. When he reached Medina, I took the camel to him in the
morning and he paid me its price.

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 571:
Narrated Al-Amash:
When we were with Ibrahim, we talked about mortgaging in deals of Salam.
Ibrahim narrated from Aswad that 'Aisha had said, "The Prophet bought
some foodstuff on credit from a Jew and mortgaged an iron armor to him."

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 572:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Whoever takes the money of the people with the
intention of repaying it, Allah will repay it on his behalf, and whoever takes it
in order to spoil it, then Allah will spoil him."

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 573:
Narrated Abu Dhar:
Once, while I was in the company of the Prophet, he saw the mountain of
Uhud and said, "I would not like to have this mountain turned into gold for
me unless nothing of it, not even a single Dinar remains of it with me for
more than three days (i.e. I will spend all of it in Allah's Cause), except that
Dinar which I will keep for repaying debts." Then he said, "Those who are
rich in this world would have little reward in the Hereafter except those who
spend their money here and there (in Allah's Cause), and they are few in
number." Then he ordered me to stay at my place and went not far away. I
heard a voice and intended to go to him but I remembered his order, "Stay
at your place till I return." On his return I said, "O Allah's Apostle! (What
was) that noise which I heard?" He said, "Did you hear anything?" I said,
"Yes." He said, "Gabriel came and said to me, 'Whoever amongst your
followers dies, worshipping none along with Allah, will enter Paradise.' " I
said, "Even if he did such-and-such things (i.e. even if he stole or committed
illegal sexual intercourse)" He said, "Yes."

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 574:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If I had gold equal to the mountain of Uhud, it would
not please me that it should remain with me for more than three days,
except an amount which I would keep for repaying debts."

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 575:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man demanded his debts from Allah's Apostle in such a rude manner that
the companions of the Prophet intended to harm him, but the Prophet said,
"Leave him, no doubt, for he (the creditor) has the right to demand it
(harshly). Buy a camel and give it to him." They said, "The camel that is
available is older than the camel he demands. "The Prophet said, "Buy it and
give it to him, for the best among you are those who repay their debts
handsomely. "

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 576:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Once a man died and was asked, 'What did you
use to say (or do) (in your life time)?' He replied, 'I was a business-man and
used to give time to the rich to repay his debt and (used to) deduct part of
the debt of the poor.' So he was forgiven (his sins.)" Abu Masud said, "I
heard the same (Hadith) from the Prophet."

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 577:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man came to the Prophet and demanded a camel (the Prophet owed him).
Allah's Apostle told his companions to give him (a camel). They said, "We do
not find except an older camel (than what he demands). (The Prophet
ordered them to give him that camel). The man said, "You have paid me in
full and may Allah also pay you in full." Allah's Apostle said, "Give him, for
the best amongst the people is he who repays his debts in the most
handsome manner."

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 578:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet owed a camel of a certain age to a man who came to demand it
back. The Prophet ordered his companions to give him. They looked for a
camel of the same age but found nothing but a camel one year older. The
Prophet told them to give it to him. The man said, "You have paid me in full,
and may Allah pay you in full." The Prophet said, "The best amongst you is
he who pays his debts in the most handsome manner."

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 579:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
I went to the Prophet while he was in the Mosque. (Mis'ar thinks, that Jabir
went in the forenoon.) After the Prophet told me to pray two Rakat, he
repayed me the debt he owed me and gave me an extra amount.

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 580:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
My father was martyred on the day (of the battle) of Uhud, and he was in
debt. His creditors demanded their rights persistently. I went to the Prophet
(and informed him about it). He told them to take the fruits of my garden
and exempt my father from the debts but they refused to do so. So, the
Prophet did not give them my garden and told me that he would come to
me the next morning. He came to us early in the morning and wandered
among the datepalms and invoked Allah to bless their fruits. I then plucked
the dates and paid the creditors, and there remained some of the dates for
us.

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 581:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
When my father died he owed a Jew thirty Awsuq (of dates). I requested
him to give me respite for repaying but he refused. I requested Allah's
Apostle to intercede with the Jew. Allah's Apostle went to the Jew and
asked him to accept the fruits of my trees in place of the debt but the Jew
refused. Allah's Apostle entered the garden of the date-palms, wandering
among the trees and ordered me (saying), "Pluck (the fruits) and give him
his due." So, I plucked the fruits for him after the departure of Allah's
Apostle and gave his thirty Awsuq, and still had seventeen Awsuq extra for
myself. Jabir said: I went to Allah's Apostle to inform of what had happened,
but found him praying the 'Asr prayer. After the prayer I told him about the
extra fruits which remained. Allah's Apostle told me to inform (Umar) Ibn AlKhatab about it. When I went to 'Umar and told him about it, 'Umar said,
"When Allah's Apostle walked in your garden, I was sure that Allah would
definitely bless it."

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 582:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle used to invoke Allah in the prayer saying, "O Allah, I seek
refuge with you from all sins, and from being in debt." Someone said, O
Allah's Apostle! (I see you) very often you seek refuge with Allah from being
in debt. He replied, "If a person is in debt, he tells lies when he speaks, and
breaks his promises when he promises."

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 583:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "If someone leaves some property, it will be for the
inheritors, and if he leaves some weak offspring, it will be for us to support
them."

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 584:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "I am closer to the believers than their selves in this world
and in the Hereafter, and if you like, you can read Allah's Statement: "The
Prophet is closer to the believers than their own selves." (33.6) So, if a true
believer dies and leaves behind some property, it will be for his inheritors
(from the father's side), and if he leaves behind some debt to be paid or
needy offspring, then they should come to me as I am the guardian of the
deceased."

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 585:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Procrastination (delay) in repaying debts by a wealthy
person is injustice."

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 586:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man came to the Prophet and demanded his debts and used harsh words.
The companions of the Prophet wanted to harm him, but the Prophet said,
"Leave him, as the creditor (owner of the right) has the right to speak."

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 587:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If a man finds his very things with a bankrupt, he has
more right to take them back than anyone else."

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 588:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
A man pledged that his slave would be manumitted after his death. The
Prophet asked, "Who will buy the slave from me?" No'aim bin 'Abdullah
bought the slave and the Prophet took its price and gave it to the owner.

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 589:
Narrated Jabir:
When 'Abdullah (my father) died, he left behind children and debts. I asked
the lenders to put down some of his debt, but they refused, so I went to the
Prophet to intercede with them, yet they refused. The Prophet said (to me),
"Classify your dates into their different kinds: 'Adhq bin Zaid, Lean and
'Ajwa, each kind alone and call all the creditors and wait till I come to you." I
did so and the Prophet came and sat beside the dates and started
measuring to each his due till he paid them fully, and the amount of dates
remained as it was before, as if he had not touched them.
(On another occasion) I took part in one of Ghazawat among with the
Prophet and I was riding one of our camels. The camel got tired and was
lagging behind the others. The Prophet hit it on its back. He said, "Sell it to
me, and you have the right to ride it till Medina.'' When we approached
Medina, I took the permission from the Prophet to go to my house, saying,
"O Allah's Apostle! I have newly married." The Prophet asked, "Have you
married a virgin or a matron (a widow or divorcee)?" I said, "I have married a
matron, as 'Abdullah (my father) died and left behind daughters small in
their ages, so I married a matron who may teach them and bring them up
with good manners." The Prophet then said (to me), "Go to your family."
When I went there and told my maternal uncle about the selling of the
camel, he admonished me for it. On that I told him about its slowness and
exhaustion and about what the Prophet had done to the camel and his
hitting it. When the Prophet arrived, I went to him with the camel in the
morning and he gave me its price, the camel itself, and my share from the
war booty as he gave the other people.

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 590:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
A man came to the Prophet and said, "I am often betrayed in bargaining."
The Prophet advised him, "When you buy something, say (to the seller), 'No
deception." The man used to say so afterwards.

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 591:
Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba:
The Prophet said, "Allah has forbidden for you, (1) to be undutiful to your
mothers, (2) to bury your daughters alive, (3) to not to pay the rights of the
others (e.g. charity, etc.) and (4) to beg of men (begging). And Allah has
hated for you (1) vain, useless talk, or that you talk too much about others,
(2) to ask too many questions, (in disputed religious matters) and (3) to
waste the wealth (by extravagance).

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 592:
Narrated Abdullah bin 'Umar:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Everyone of you is a guardian, and
responsible for what is in his custody. The ruler is a guardian of his subjects
and responsible for them; a husband is a guardian of his family and is
responsible for it; a lady is a guardian of her husband's house and is
responsible for it, and a servant is a guardian of his master's property and is
responsible for it." I heard that from Allah's Apostle and I think that the
Prophet also said, "A man is a guardian of is father's property and is
responsible for it, so all of you are guardians and responsible for your wards
and things under your care."

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 593:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
I heard a man reciting a verse (of the Holy Qur'an) but I had heard the
Prophet reciting it differently. So, I caught hold of the man by the hand and
took him to Allah's Apostle who said, "Both of you are right." Shu'ba, the
sub-narrator said, "I think he said to them, "Don't differ, for the nations
before you differed and perished (because of their differences). "

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 594:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Two persons, a Muslim and a Jew, quarrelled. The Muslim said, "By Him Who
gave Muhammad superiority over all the people! The Jew said, "By Him Who
gave Moses superiority over all the people!" At that the Muslim raised his
hand and slapped the Jew on the face. The Jew went to the Prophet and
informed him of what had happened between him and the Muslim. The
Prophet sent for the Muslim and asked him about it. The Muslim informed
him of the event. The Prophet said, "Do not give me superiority over Moses,
for on the Day of Resurrection all the people will fall unconscious and I will
be one of them, but I will. be the first to gain consciousness, and will see
Moses standing and holding the side of the Throne (of Allah). I will not know
whether (Moses) has also fallen unconscious and got up before me, or Allah
has exempted him from that stroke."

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 595:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
While Allah's Apostle was sitting, a Jew came and said, "O Abul Qasim! One
of your companions has slapped me on my face." The Prophet asked who
that was. He replied that he was one of the Ansar. The Prophet sent for him,
and on his arrival, he asked him whether he had beaten the Jew. He (replied
in the affirmative and) said, "I heard him taking an oath in the market saying,
'By Him Who gave Moses superiority over all the human beings.' I said, 'O
wicked man! (Has Allah given Moses superiority) even over Muhammad I
became furious
and slapped him over his face." The Prophet said, "Do not give a prophet
superiority over another, for on the Day of Resurrection all the people will
fall unconscious and I will be the first to emerge from the earth, and will see
Moses standing and holding one of the legs of the Throne. I will not know
whether Moses has fallen unconscious or the first unconsciousness was
sufficient for him."

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 596:
Narrated Anas:
A Jew crushed the head of a girl between two stones. The girl was asked
who had crushed her head, and some names were mentioned before her,
and when the name of the Jew was mentioned, she nodded agreeing. The
Jew was captured and when he confessed, the Prophet ordered that his
head be crushed between two stones.

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 597:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
A man was often cheated in buying. The Prophet said to him, "When you
buy something, say (to the seller), No cheating." The man used to say so
thenceforward .

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 598:
Narrated Jabir: A man manumitted a slave and he had no other property
than that, so the Prophet cancelled the manumission (and sold the slave for
him). No'aim bin Al-Nahham bought the slave from him.

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 599:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever takes a false oath so as to take the property
of a Muslim (illegally) will meet Allah while He will be angry with him." AlAsh'ath said: By Allah, that saying concerned me. I had common land with a
Jew, and the Jew later on denied my ownership, so I took him to the
Prophet who asked me whether I had a proof of my ownership. When I
replied in the negative, the Prophet asked the Jew to take an oath. I said, "O
Allah's Apostle! He will take an oath and deprive me of my property." So,
Allah revealed the following verse: "Verily! Those who purchase a little gain
at the cost of Allah's covenant and their oaths." (3.77)
Volume 3, Book 41, Number 600:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Ka'b bin Malik:
Ka'b demanded his debt back from Ibn Abi Hadrad in the Mosque and their
voices grew louder till Allah's Apostle heard them while he was in his house.
He came out to them raising the curtain of his room and addressed Ka'b, "O
Ka'b!" Ka'b replied, "Labaik, O Allah's Apostle." (He said to him), "Reduce
your debt to one half," gesturing with his hand. Kab said, "I have done so, O
Allah's Apostle!" On that the Prophet said to Ibn Abi Hadrad, "Get up and
repay the debt, to him."

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 601:
Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:
I heard Hisham bin Hakim bin Hizam reciting Surat-al-Furqan in a way
different to that of mine. Allah's Apostle had taught it to me (in a different
way). So, I was about to quarrel with him (during the prayer) but I waited till
he finished, then I tied his garment round his neck and seized him by it and
brought him to Allah's Apostle and said, "I have heard him reciting Surat-alFurqan in a way different to the way you taught it to me." The Prophet
ordered me to release him and asked Hisham to recite it. When he recited it,
Allah s Apostle said, "It was revealed in this way." He then asked me to
recite it. When I recited it, he said, "It was revealed in this way. The Qur'an
has been revealed in seven different ways, so recite it in the way that is
easier for you."

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 602:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "No doubt, I intended to order somebody to pronounce
the Iqama of the (compulsory congregational) prayer and then I would go to
the houses of those who do not attend the prayer and burn their houses
over them."

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 603:
Narrated Aisha:
Abu bin Zam'a and Sad bin Abi Waqqas carried the case of their claim of the
(ownership) of the son of a slave-qirl of Zam'a before the Prophet. Sad said,
"O Allah's Apostle! My brother, before his death, told me that when I would
return (to Mecca), I should search for the son of the slave-girl of Zam'a and
take him into my custody as he was his son." 'Abu bin Zam'a said, 'the is my
brother and the son of the slave-girl of my father, and was born or my
father's bed." The Prophet noticed a resemblance between Utba and the
boy but he said, "O 'Abu bin Zam'a! You will get this boy, as the son goes to
the owner of the bed. You, Sauda, screen yourself from the boy."

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 604:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle sent horsemen to Najd and they arrested and brought a man
called Thumama bin Uthal, the chief of Yamama, and they fastened him to
one of the pillars of the Mosque. When Allah's Apostle came up to him; he
asked, "What have you to say, O Thumama?" He replied, "I have good news,
O Muhammad!" Abu Huraira narrated the whole narration which ended with
the order of the Prophet "Release him!"

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 605:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet sent some horsemen to Najd and they arrested and brought a
man called Thumama bin Uthal from the tribe of Bani Hanifa, and they
fastened him to one of the pillars of the Mosque.
Volume 3, Book 41, Number 606:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Ka'b bin Malik Al-Ansari from Ka'b bin Malik:
That 'Abdullah bin Abi Hadrad Al-Aslami owed him some debt. Ka'b met him
and caught hold of him and they started talking and their voices grew
loudest. The Prophet passed by them and addressed Ka'b, pointing out to
him to reduce the debt to one half. So, Ka'b got one half of the debt and
exempted the debtor from the other half.

Volume 3, Book 41, Number 607:
Narrated Khabbab:
I was a blacksmith In the Pre-lslamic period of ignorance, and 'Asi bin Wail
owed me some money. I went to him to demand it, but he said to me, "I will
not pay you unless you reject faith in Muhammad." I replied, "By Allah, I will
never disbelieve Muhammad till Allah let you die and then resurrect you." He
said, "Then wait till I die and come to life again, for then I will be given
property and offspring and will pay your right." So, thus revelation came:
"Have you seen him who disbelieved in Our signs and yet says, 'I will be
given property and offspring?' " (19.77)
BOOK 42. LOST THINGS PICKED UP BY SOMEONE (LUQAATA) (608-619)
Volume 3, Book 42, Number 608:
Narrated Ubai bin Ka'b:
I found a purse containing one hundred Diners. So I went to the Prophet
(and informed him about it), he said, "Make public announcement about it
for one year" I did so, but nobody turned up to claim it, so I again went to
the Prophet who said, "Make public announcement for another year." I did,
but none turned up to claim it. I went to him for the third time and he said,
"Keep the container and the string which is used for its tying and count the
money it contains and if its owner comes, give it to him; otherwise, utilize
it."
The sub-narrator Salama said, "I met him (Suwaid, another sub-narrator) in
Mecca and he said, 'I don't know whether Ubai made the announcement for
three years or just one year.' "

Volume 3, Book 42, Number 609:
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani:
A bedouin went to the Prophet and asked him about picking up a lost thing.
The Prophet said, "Make public announcement about it for one year.
Remember the description of its container and the string with which it is
tied; and if somebody comes and claims it and describes it correctly, (give it
to him); otherwise, utilize it." He said, "O Allah's Apostle! What about a lost
sheep?" The Prophet said, "It is for you, for your brother (i.e. its owner), or
for the wolf." He further asked, "What about a lost camel?" On that the face
of the Prophet became red (with anger) and said, "You have nothing to do
with it, as it has its feet, its water reserve and can reach places of water and
drink, and eat trees."
Volume 3, Book 42, Number 610:
Narrated Sulaiman bin Bilal from Yahya:
Yazid Maula Al-Munba'ith heard Zaid bin Khalid al-Juham saying, "The
Prophet was asked about Luqata. He said, 'Remember the description of its
container and the string it is tied with, and announce it publicly for one
year.' " Yazid added, "If nobody claims then the person who has found it can
spend it, and it is regarded as a trust entrusted to him." Yahya said, "I do not
know whether the last sentences were said by the Prophet or by Yazid."
Zaid further said, "The Prophet was asked, 'What about a lost sheep?' The
Prophet said, 'Take it, for it is for you or for your brother (i.e. its owner) or
for the wolf." Yazid added that it should also be announced publicly. The
man then asked the Prophet about a lost camel. The Prophet said, "Leave it,
as it has its feet, water container (reservoir), and it will reach a place of
water and eat trees till its owner finds it."

Volume 3, Book 42, Number 611:
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid:
A man came and asked Allah's Apostle about picking a lost thing. The
Prophet said, "Remember the description of its container and the string it is
tied with, and make public announcement about it for one year. If the owner
shows up, give it to him; otherwise, do whatever you like with it." He then
asked, "What about a lost sheep?" The Prophet said, "It is for you, for your
brother (i.e. its owner), or for the wolf." He further asked, "What about a
lost camel?" The Prophet said, "It is none of your concern. It has its watercontainer (reservoir) and its feet, and it will reach water and drink it and eat
the trees till its owner finds it."

Volume 3, Book 42, Number 612:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet passed a date fallen on the way and said, "Were I not afraid
that it may be from a Sadaqa (charitable gifts), I would have eaten it."
Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet said, "Sometimes when I return home
and find a date fallen on my bed, I pick it up in order to eat it, but I fear that
it might be from a Sadaqa, so I throw it."

Volume 3, Book 42, Number 613:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
When Allah gave victory to His Apostle over the people of Mecca, Allah's
Apostle stood up among the people and after glorifying Allah, said, "Allah
has prohibited fighting in Mecca and has given authority to His Apostle and
the believers over it, so fighting was illegal for anyone before me, and was
made legal for me for a part of a day, and it will not be legal for anyone after
me. Its game should not be chased, its thorny bushes should not be
uprooted, and picking up its fallen things is not allowed except for one who
makes public announcement for it, and he whose relative is murdered has
the option either to accept a compensation for it or to retaliate." Al-'Abbas
said, "Except Al-ldhkhir, for we use it in our graves and houses." Allah's
Apostle said, "Except Al-ldhkhir." Abu Shah, a Yemenite, stood up and said,
"O Allah's Apostle! Get it written for me." Allah's Apostle said, "Write it for
Abu Shah." (The sub-narrator asked Al-Auza'i): What did he mean by saying,
"Get it written, O Allah's Apostle?" He replied, "The speech which he had
heard from Allah's Apostle ."

Volume 3, Book 42, Number 614:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "An animal should not be milked without the
permission of its owner. Does any of you like that somebody comes to his
store and breaks his container and takes away his food? The udders of the
animals are the stores of their owners where their provision is kept, so
nobody should milk the animals of somebody else, without the permission
of its owner."

Volume 3, Book 42, Number 615:
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani:
A man asked Allah's Apostle about the Luqata. He said, "Make public
announcement of it for one year, then remember the description of its
container and the string it is tied with, utilize the money, and if its owner
comes back after that, give it to him." The people asked, "O Allah's Apostle!
What about a lost sheep?" Allah's Apostle said, "Take it, for it is for you, for
your brother, or for the wolf." The man asked, "O Allah's Apostle! What
about a lost camel?" Allah's Apostle got angry and his cheeks or face
became red, and said, "You have no concern with it as it has its feet, and its
water-container, till its owner finds it."

Volume 3, Book 42, Number 616:
Narrated Suwaid bin Ghafala:
While I as in the company of Salman bin Rabi'a and Suhan, in one of the holy
battles, I found a whip. One of them told me to drop it but I refused to do so
and said that I would give it to its owner if I found him, otherwise I would
utilize it. On our return we performed Hajj and on passing by Medina, I asked
Ubai bin Ka'b about it. He said, "I found a bag containing a hundred Dinars in
the lifetime of the Prophet and took it to the Prophet who said to me, 'Make
public announcement about it for one year.' So, I announced it for one year
and went to the Prophet who said, 'Announce it publicly for another year.'
So, I announced it for another year. I went to him again and he said,
"Announce for an other year." So I announced for still another year. I went
to the Prophet for the fourth time, and he said, 'Remember the amount of
money, the description of its container and the string it is tied with, and if
the owner comes, give it to him; otherwise, utilize it.' "
Volume 3, Book 42, Number 617:
Narrated Salama:
the above narration (Hadith 616) from Ubai bin Ka'b: adding, "I met the subnarrator at Mecca later on, but he did not remember whether Ka'b had
announced what he had found one year or three years."

Volume 3, Book 42, Number 618:
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid:
A bedouin asked the Prophet about the Luqata. The Prophet said, "Make
public announcement about it for one year and if then somebody comes and
describes the container of the Luqata and the string it was tied with, (give it
to him); otherwise, spend it." He then asked the Prophet about a lost camel.
The face of the Prophet become red and he said, "You have o concern with
it as it has its water reservoir and feet and it will reach water and drink and
eat trees. Leave it till its owner finds it." He then asked the Prophet about a
lost sheep. The Prophet said, "It is for you, for your brother, or for the wolf."

Volume 3, Book 42, Number 619:
Narrated Abu Bakr:
While I was on my way, all of a sudden I saw a shepherd driving his sheep, I
asked him whose servant he was. He replied that he was the servant of a
man from Quraish, and then he mentioned his name and I recognized him. I
asked, "Do your sheep have some milk?" He replied in the affirmative. I said,
"Are you going to milk for me?" He replied in the affirmative. I ordered him
and he tied the legs of one of the sheep. Then I told him to clean the udder
(teats) of dust and to remove dust off his hands. He removed the dust off
his hands by clapping his hands. He then milked a little milk. I put the milk
for Allah's Apostle in a pot and closed its mouth with a piece of cloth and
poured water over it till it became cold. I took it to the Prophet and said,
"Drink, O Allah's Apostle!" He drank it till I was pleased.


BOOK 43. OPPRESSIONS (620-662)
Volume 3, Book 43, Number 620:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle said, "When the believers pass safely over (the bridge
across) Hell, they will be stopped at a bridge in between Hell and Paradise
where they will retaliate upon each other for the injustices done among
them in the world, and when they get purified of all their sins, they will be
admitted into Paradise. By Him in Whose Hands the life of Muhammad is
everybody will recognize his dwelling in Paradise better than he recognizes
his dwelling in this world."

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 621:
Narrated Safwan bin Muhriz Almazini:
While I was walking with Ibn 'Umar holding his hand, a man came in front of
us and asked, "What have you heard from Allah's Apostle about An-Najwa?"
Ibn 'Umar said, "I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'Allah will bring a believer
near Him and shelter him with His Screen and ask him: Did you commit suchand-such sins? He will say: Yes, my Lord. Allah will keep on asking him till he
will confess all his sins and will think that he is ruined. Allah will say: 'I did
screen your sins in the world and I forgive them for you today', and then he
will be given the book of his good deeds. Regarding infidels and hypocrites
(their evil acts will be exposed publicly) and the witnesses will say: These are
the people who lied against their Lord. Behold! The Curse of Allah is upon
the wrongdoers." (11.18)

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 622:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "A Muslim is a brother of another Muslim, so he should
not oppress him, nor should he hand him over to an oppressor. Whoever
fulfilled the needs of his brother, Allah will fulfill his needs; whoever brought
his (Muslim) brother out of a discomfort, Allah will bring him out of the
discomforts of the Day of Resurrection, and whoever screened a Muslim,
Allah will screen him on the Day of Resurrection . "

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 623:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "Help your brother, whether he is an oppressor or he is
an oppressed one."

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 624:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle said, "Help your brother, whether he is an oppressor or he is
an oppressed one. People asked, "O Allah's Apostle! It is all right to help him
if he is oppressed, but how should we help him if he is an oppressor?" The
Prophet said, "By preventing him from oppressing others."

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 625:
Narrated Muawiya bin Suwald:
I heard Al-Bara' bin 'Azib saying, "The Prophet orders us to do seven things
and prohibited us from doing seven other things." Then Al-Bara' mentioned
the following:-(1) To pay a visit to the sick (inquiring about his health),
(2) to follow funeral processions,
(3) to say to a sneezer, "May Allah be merciful to you" (if he says, "Praise be
to Allah!")
(4) to return greetings,
(5) to help the oppressed,
(6) to accept invitations,
(7) to help others to fulfill their oaths. (See Hadith No. 753, Vol. 7)

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 626:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "A believer to another believer is like a building whose
different parts enforce each other." The Prophet then clasped his hands
with the fingers interlaced (while saying that).

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 627:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "Oppression will be a darkness on the Day of
Resurrection."

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 628:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet sent Mu'adh to Yemen and said, "Be afraid, from the curse of
the oppressed as there is no screen between his invocation and Allah."

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 629:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever has oppressed another person concerning
his reputation or anything else, he should beg him to forgive him before the
Day of Resurrection when there will be no money (to compensate for wrong
deeds), but if he has good deeds, those good deeds will be taken from him
according to his oppression which he has done, and if he has no good deeds,
the sins of the oppressed person will be loaded on him."

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 630:
Narrated Aisha:
Regarding the explanation of the following verse:-- "If a wife fears Cruelty or
desertion On her husband's part." (4.128) A man may dislike his wife and
intend to divorce her, so she says to him, "I give up my rights, so do not
divorce me." The above verse was revealed concerning such a case.

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 631:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi:
A drink (milk mixed with water) was brought to Allah's Apostle who drank
some of it. A boy was sitting to his right, and some old men to his left.
Allah's Apostle said to the boy, "Do you allow me to give the rest of the
drink to these people?" The boy said, "O Allah's Apostle! I will not give
preference to anyone over me to drink the rest of it from which you have
drunk." Allah's Apostle then handed the bowl (of drink) to the boy. (See
Hadith No. 541).

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 632:
Narrated Said bin Zaid:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever usurps the land of somebody unjustly, his
neck will be encircled with it down the seven earths (on the Day of
Resurrection). "
Volume 3, Book 43, Number 633:
Narrated Abu Salama:
That there was a dispute between him and some people (about a piece of
land). When he told 'Aisha about it, she said, "O Abu Salama! Avoid taking
the land unjustly, for the Prophet said, 'Whoever usurps even one span of
the land of somebody, his neck will be encircled with it down the seven
earths."

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 634:
Narrated Salim's father (i.e. 'Abdullah):
The Prophet said, "Whoever takes a piece of the land of others unjustly, he
will sink down the seven earths on the Day of Resurrection."

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 635:
Narrated Jabala:
"We were in Medina with some of the Iraqi people, and we were struck with
famine and Ibn Az-Zubair used to give us dates. Ibn 'Umar used to pass by
and say, "The Prophet forbade us to eat two dates at a time, unless one
takes the permission of one's companions."

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 636:
Narrated Abu Mas'ud:
There was an Ansari man called Abu Shu'aib who had a slave butcher. Abu
Shu'aib said to him, "Prepare a meal sufficient for five persons so that I
might invite the Prophet besides other four persons." Abu Shu'aib had seen
the signs of hunger on the face of the Prophet and so he invited him.
Another man who was not invited, followed the Prophet. The Prophet said
to Abu Shu'aib, "This man has followed us. Do you allow him to share the
meal?" Abu Shu'aib said, "Yes."

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 637:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "The most hated person in the sight of Allah is the most
quarrelsome person."

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 638:
Narrated Um Salama:
(the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle heard some people quarreling at
the door of his dwelling. He came out and said, "I am only a human being,
and opponents come to me (to settle their problems); maybe someone
amongst you can present his case more eloquently than the other, whereby
I may consider him true and give a verdict in his favor. So, If I give the right
of a Muslim to another by mistake, then it is really a portion of (Hell) Fire, he
has the option to take or give up (before the Day of Resurrection)."

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 639:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
The Prophet said, "Whoever has (the following) four characters will be a
hypocrite, and whoever has one of the following four characteristics will
have one characteristic of hypocrisy until he gives it up. These are: (1 )
Whenever he talks, he tells a lie; (2) whenever he makes a promise, he
breaks it; (3) whenever he makes a covenant he proves treacherous; (4) and
whenever he quarrels, he behaves impudently in an evil insulting manner."
(See Hadith No. 33 Vol. 1)
Volume 3, Book 43, Number 640:
Narrated Aisha:
Hind bint 'Utba (Abu Sufyan's wife) came and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Abu
Sufyan is a miser. Is there any harm if I spend something from his property
for our children?" He said, there is no harm for you if you feed them from it
justly and reasonably (with no extravagance)."

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 641:
Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir:
We staid to the Prophet, "You send us out and it happens that we have to
stay with such people as do not entertain us. What do you think about it? He
said to us, "If you stay with some people and they entertain you as they
should for a guest, accept their hospitality, but If they don't do, take the
right of the guest from them."

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 642:
Narrated 'Umar:
When Allah took away the soul of His Prophet at his death, the Ansar
assembled In the shed of Bani Sa'ida. I said to Abu Bakr, "Let us go." So, we
come to them (i.e. to Ansar) at the shed of Bani Sa'ida. (See Hadith No. 19,
Vol. 5 for details)

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 643:
Narrated Al-Araj:
Abu Huraira said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'No-one should prevent his neighbor
from fixing a wooden peg in his wall." Abu Huraira said (to his companions),
"Why do I find you averse to it? By Allah, I certainly will narrate it to you."
Volume 3, Book 43, Number 644:
Narrated Anas:
I was the butler of the people in the house of Abu Talha, and in those days
drinks were prepared from dates. Allah's Apostle ordered somebody to
announce that alcoholic drinks had been prohibited. Abu Talha ordered me
to go out and spill the wine. I went out and spilled it, and it flowed in the
streets of Medina. Some people said, "Some people were killed and wine
was still in their stomachs." On that the Divine revelation came:-- "On those
who believe And do good deeds There is no blame For what they ate (in the
past)." (5.93)

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 645:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said, "Beware! Avoid sitting on he roads (ways)." The people
said, "There is no way out of it as these are our sitting places where we have
talks." The Prophet said, "If you must sit there, then observe the rights of
the way." They asked, "What are the rights of the way?" He said, "They are
the lowering of your gazes (on seeing what is illegal to look at), refraining
from harming people, returning greetings, advocating good and forbidding
evil."

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 646:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "A man felt very thirsty while he was on the way, there he
came across a well. He went down the well, quenched his thirst and came
out. Meanwhile he saw a dog panting and licking mud because of excessive
thirst. He said to himself, "This dog is suffering from thirst as I did." So, he
went down the well again and filled his shoe with water and watered it.
Allah thanked him for that deed and forgave him. The people said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Is there a reward for us in serving the animals?" He replied: "Yes,
there is a reward for serving any animate (living being)." (See Hadith No.
551)

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 647:
Narrated Usama bin Zaid:
Once the Prophet stood at the top of one of the castles (or higher buildings)
of Medina and said, "Do you see what I see? No doubt I am seeing the spots
of afflictions amongst your houses as numerous as the spots where raindrops fall (during a heavy rain). (See Hadith No. 102)

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 648:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
I had been eager to ask 'Umar about the two ladies from among the wives
of the Prophet regarding whom Allah said (in the Qur'an saying): If you two
(wives of the Prophet namely Aisha and Hafsa) turn in repentance to Allah
your hearts are indeed so inclined (to oppose what the Prophet likes) (66.4),
till performed the Hajj along with 'Umar (and on our way back from Hajj) he
went aside (to answer the call of nature) and I also went aside along with
him carrying a tumbler of water. When he had answered the call of nature
and returned. I poured water on his hands from the tumbler and he
performed ablution. I said, "O Chief of the believers! ' Who were the two
ladies from among the wives of the Prophet to whom Allah said:
'If you two return in repentance (66.4)? He said, "I am astonished at your
question, O Ibn 'Abbas. They were Aisha and Hafsa."
Then 'Umar went on relating the narration and said. "I and an Ansari
neighbor of mine from Bani Umaiya bin Zaid who used to live in 'Awali AlMedina, used to visit the Prophet in turns. He used to go one day, and I
another day. When I went I would bring him the news of what had
happened that day regarding the instructions and orders and when he went,
he used to do the same for me. We, the people of Quraish, used to have
authority over women, but when we came to live with the Ansar, we noticed
that the Ansari women had the upper hand over their men, so our women
started acquiring the habits of the Ansari women. Once I shouted at my wife
and she paid me back in my coin and I disliked that she should answer me
back. She said, 'Why do you take it ill that I retort upon you? By Allah, the
wives of the Prophet retort upon him, and some of them may not speak
with him for the whole day till night.' What she said scared me and I said to
her, 'Whoever amongst them does so, will be a great loser.' Then I dressed
myself and went to Hafsa and asked her, 'Does any of you keep Allah's
Apostle angry all the day long till night?' She replied in the affirmative. I said,
'She is a ruined losing person (and will never have success)! Doesn't she fear
that Allah may get angry for the anger of Allah's Apostle and thus she will be
ruined? Don't ask Allah's Apostle too many things, and don't retort upon him
in any case, and don't desert him. Demand from me whatever you like, and
don't be tempted to imitate your neighbor (i.e. 'Aisha) in her behavior
towards the Prophet), for she (i.e. Aisha) is more beautiful than you, and
more beloved to Allah's Apostle.
In those days it was rumored that Ghassan, (a tribe living in Sham) was
getting prepared their horses to invade us. My companion went (to the
Prophet on the day of his turn, went and returned to us at night and
knocked at my door violently, asking whether I was sleeping. I was scared
(by the hard knocking) and came out to him. He said that a great thing had
happened. I asked him: What is it? Have Ghassan come? He replied that it
was worse and more serious than that, and added that Allah's Apostle had
divorced all his wives. I said, Hafsa is a ruined loser! I expected that would
happen some day.' So I dressed myself and offered the Fajr prayer with the
Prophet. Then the Prophet entered an upper room and stayed there alone. I
went to Hafsa and found her weeping. I asked her, 'Why are you weeping?
Didn't I warn you? Have Allah's Apostle divorced you all?' She replied, 'I don't
know. He is there in the upper room.' I then went out and came to the pulpit
and found a group of people around it and some of them were weeping.
Then I sat with them for some time, but could not endure the situation. So I
went to the upper room where the Prophet was and requested to a black
slave of his: "Will you get the permission of (Allah's Apostle) for Umar (to
enter)? The slave went in, talked to the Prophet about it and came out
saying, 'I mentioned you to him but he did not reply.' So, I went and sat with
the people who were sitting by the pulpit, but I could not bear the situation,
so I went to the slave again and said: "Will you get he permission for Umar?
He went in and brought the same reply as before. When I was leaving,
behold, the slave called me saying, "Allah's Apostle has granted you
permission." So, I entered upon the Prophet and saw him lying on a mat
without wedding on it, and the mat had left its mark on the body of the
Prophet, and he was leaning on a leather pillow stuffed with palm fires. I
greeted him and while still standing, I said: "Have you divorced your wives?'
He raised his eyes to me and replied in the negative. And then while still
standing, I said chatting: "Will you heed what I say, 'O Allah's Apostle! We,
the people of Quraish used to have the upper hand over our women (wives),
and when we came to the people whose women had the upper hand over
them..."
'Umar told the whole story (about his wife). "On that the Prophet smiled."
'Umar further said, "I then said, 'I went to Hafsa and said to her: Do not be
tempted to imitate your companion ('Aisha) for she is more beautiful than
you and more beloved to the Prophet.' The Prophet smiled again. When I
saw him smiling, I sat down and cast a glance at the room, and by Allah, I
couldn't see anything of importance but three hides. I said (to Allah's
Apostle) "Invoke Allah to make your followers prosperous for the Persians
and the Byzantines have been made prosperous and given worldly luxuries,
though they do not worship Allah?' The Prophet was leaning then (and on
hearing my speech he sat straight) and said, 'O Ibn Al-Khatttab! Do you have
any doubt (that the Hereafter is better than this world)? These people have
been given rewards of their good deeds in this world only.' I asked the
Prophet . 'Please ask Allah's forgiveness for me. The Prophet did not go to
his wives because of the secret which Hafsa had disclosed to 'Aisha, and he
said that he would not go to his wives for one month as he was angry with
them when Allah admonished him (for his oath that he would not approach
Maria). When twenty-nine days had passed, the Prophet went to Aisha first
of all. She said to him, 'You took an oath that you would not come to us for
one month, and today only twenty-nine days have passed, as I have been
counting them day by day.' The Prophet said, 'The month is also of twentynine days.' That month consisted of twenty-nine days. 'Aisha said, 'When the
Divine revelation of Choice was revealed, the Prophet started with me,
saying to me, 'I am telling you something, but you needn't hurry to give the
reply till you can consult your parents." 'Aisha knew that her parents would
not advise her to part with the Prophet . The Prophet said that Allah had
said:-'O Prophet! Say To your wives; If you desire The life of this world And its
glitter, ... then come! I will make a provision for you and set you free In a
handsome manner. But if you seek Allah And His Apostle, and The Home of
the Hereafter, then Verily, Allah has prepared For the good-doers amongst
you A great reward.' (33.28) 'Aisha said, 'Am I to consult my parents about
this? I indeed prefer Allah, His Apostle, and the Home of the Hereafter.'
After that the Prophet gave the choice to his other wives and they also gave
the same reply as 'Aisha did."

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 649:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle took an oath that he would not go to his wives for one
month as his foot had been sprained. He stayed in an upper room when
'Umar went to him and said, "Have you divorced your wives?" He said, "No,
but I have taken an oath that I would not go to them for one month." The
Prophet stayed there for twenty-nine days, and then came down and went
to his wives.

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 650:
Narrated Jabir:
The Prophet entered the Mosque, and I too went there after tying the camel
at the pavement of the Mosque. I said (to the Prophet ), "This is your
camel." He came out and started examining the camel and said, "Both the
camel and its price are for you."
Volume 3, Book 43, Number 651:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
I saw Allah's Apostle coming (or the Prophet came) to the dumps of some
people and urinated there while standing .

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 652:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "While a man was on the way, he found a thorny branch
of a tree there on the way and removed it. Allah thanked him for that deed
and forgave him."

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 653:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet judged that seven cubits should be left as a public way when
there was a dispute about the land.

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 654:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Yazid Al-Ansari:
The Prophet forbade robbery (taking away what belongs to others without
their permission), and also forbade mutilation (or maiming) of bodies.

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 655:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "When an adulterer commits illegal sexual intercourse,
then he is not a believer at the time, he is doing it, and when a drinker of an
alcoholic liquor drinks it, then he is not a believer at the time of drinking it,
and when a thief steals, then he is not a believer at the time of stealing, and
when a robber robs, and the people look at him, then he is not a believer at
the time of doing robbery.

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 656:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The Hour will not be established until the son of Mary
(i.e. Jesus) descends amongst you as a just ruler, he will break the cross, kill
the pigs, and abolish the Jizya tax. Money will be in abundance so that
nobody will accept it (as charitable gifts).

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 657:
Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa:
On the day of Khaibar the Prophet saw fires being lighted. He asked, "Why
are these fires being lighted?" The people replied that they were cooking
the meat of donkeys. He said, "Break the pots and throw away their
contents." The people said, "Shall we throw away their contents and wash
the pots (rather than break them)?" He said, "Wash them."

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 658:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Masud:
The Prophet entered Mecca and (at that time) there were three hundredand-sixty idols around the Ka'ba. He started stabbing the idols with a stick
he had in his hand and reciting: "Truth (Islam) has come and Falsehood
(disbelief) has vanished."

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 659:
Narrated Al-Qasim
Aisha said that she hung a curtain decorated with pictures (of animates) on
a cupboard. The Prophet tore that curtain and she turned it into two
cushions which remained in the house for the Prophet to sit on.

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 660:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Whoever is killed while protecting his property
then he is a martyr."

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 661:
Narrated Anas:
While the Prophet was with one of his wives, one of the mothers of the
believers (i.e. one of his wives) sent a wooden bowl containing food with a
servant. The wife (in whose house he was sitting) stroke the bowl with her
hand and broke it. The Prophet collected the shattered pieces and put the
food back in it and said, "Eat." He kept the servant and the bowl till he had
eaten the food. Then the Prophet gave another unbroken. bowl to the
servant and kept the broken one.

Volume 3, Book 43, Number 662:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "There was an Israeli man called Juraij, while he was
praying, his mother came and called him, but he did not respond to her call.
He said (to himself) whether he should continue the prayer or reply to his
mother. She came to him the second time and called him and said, "O Allah!
Do not let him die until he sees the faces of prostitutes." Juraij used to live in
a hermitage. A woman said that she would entice Juraij, so she went to him
and presented herself (for an evil act) but he refused. She then went to a
shepherd and allowed him to commit an illegal sexual intercourse with her
and later she gave birth to a boy. She alleged that the baby was from Juraij.
The people went to Juraij and broke down his hermitage, pulled him out of it
and abused him. He performed ablution and offered the prayer, then he
went to the male (baby) and asked him; "O boy! Who is your father?" The
baby replied that his father was the shepherd. The people said that they
would build for him a hermitage of gold but Juraij asked them to make it of
mud only."
BOOK 44. PARTNERSHIP (663-684)
Volume 3, Book 44, Number 663:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
"Allah's Apostle sent an army towards the east coast and appointed Abu
'Ubaida bin Al-Jarrah as their chief, and the army consisted of three-hundred
men including myself. We marched on till we reached a place where our
food was about to finish. Abu- 'Ubaida ordered us to collect all the journey
food and it was collected. My (our) journey food was dates. Abu 'Ubaida
kept on giving us our daily ration in small amounts from it, till it was
exhausted. The share of everyone of us used to be one date only." I said,
"How could one date benefit you?" Jabir replied, "We came to know its
value when even that too finished." Jabir added, "When we reached the seashore, we saw a huge fish which was like a small mountain. The army ate
from it for eighteen days. Then Abu 'Ubaida ordered that two of its ribs be
fixed and they were fixed in the ground. Then he ordered that a she-camel
be ridden and it passed under the two ribs (forming an arch) without
touching them."

Volume 3, Book 44, Number 664:
Narrated Salama:
Once the journey food diminished and the people were reduced to poverty.
They went to the Prophet and asked his permission to slaughter their
camels, and he agreed. 'Umar met them and they told him about it, and he
said, "How would you survive after slaughtering your camels?" Then he
went to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! How would they survive
after slaughtering their camels?" Allah's Apostle ordered 'Umar, "Call upon
the people to bring what has remained of their food." A leather sheet was
spread and al I the journey food was collected and heaped over it. Allah's
Apostle stood up and invoked Allah to bless it, and then directed all the
people to come with their utensils, and they started taking from it till all of
them got what was sufficient for them. Allah's Apostle then said, "I testify
that None has the right to be worshipped but Allah, and I am His Apostle. "

Volume 3, Book 44, Number 665:
Narrated Rafi bin Khadij:
We used to offer the 'Asr prayer with the Prophet and slaughter a camel, the
meat of which would be divided in ten parts. We would eat the cooked meat
before sunset.

Volume 3, Book 44, Number 666:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "When the people of Ash'ari tribe ran short of food during
the holy battles, or the food of their families in Medina ran short, they would
collect all their remaining food in one sheet and then distribute it among
themselves equally by measuring it with a bowl. So, these people are from
me, and I am from them."

Volume 3, Book 44, Number 667:
Narrated Anas:
that Abu Bakr As-Siddiq wrote to him the law of Zakat which was made
obligatory by Allah's Apostle. He wrote: 'Partners possessing joint property
(sheep) have to pay its Zakat equally.

Volume 3, Book 44, Number 668:
Narrated 'Abaya bin Rafa'a bin Raft' bin Khadij:
My grandfather said, "We were in the company of the Prophet at DhulHulaifa. The people felt hungry and captured some camels and sheep (as
booty). The Prophet was behind the people. They hurried and slaughtered
the animals and put their meat in pots and started cooking it. (When the
Prophet came) he ordered the pots to be upset and then he distributed the
animals (of the booty), regarding ten sheep as equal to one camel. One of
the camels fled and the people ran after it till they were exhausted. At that
time there were few horses. A man threw an arrow at the camel, and Allah
stopped the camel with it. The Prophet said, "Some of these animals are like
wild animals, so if you lose control over one of these animals, treat it in this
way (i.e. shoot it with an arrow)." Before distributing them among the
soldiers my grandfather said, "We may meet the enemies in the future and
have no knives; can we slaughter the animals with reeds?" The Prophet said,
"Use whatever causes blood to flow, and eat the animals if the name of
Allah has been mentioned on slaughtering them. Do not slaughter with
teeth or fingernails and I will tell you why: It is because teeth are bones (i.e.
cannot cut properly) and fingernails are the tools used by the Ethiopians
(whom we should not imitate for they are infidels)."

Volume 3, Book 44, Number 669:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet decreed that one should not eat two dates together at a time
unless he gets the permission from his companions (sharing the meal with
him).

Volume 3, Book 44, Number 670:
Narrated Jabala:
"While at Medina we were struck with famine. Ibn Az-Zubair used to provide
us with dates as our food. Ibn 'Umar used to pass by us and say, "Don't eat
two dates together at a time as the Prophet has forbidden eating two dates
together at a time (in a gathering) unless one takes the permission of one's
companion brother."
Volume 3, Book 44, Number 671:
Narrated Nafi:
Ibn 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'If one manumits his share of a jointly
possessed slave, and can afford the price of the other shares according to
the adequate price of the slave, the slave will be completely manumitted;
otherwise he will be partially manumitted.' " (Aiyub, a sub-narrator is not
sure whether the saying " ... otherwise he will be partially manumitted" was
said by Nafi' or the Prophet.)

Volume 3, Book 44, Number 672:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Whoever manumits his share of a jointly possessed slave,
it is imperative for him to get that slave manumitted completely by paying
the remaining price, and if he does not have sufficient money to manumit
him, then the price of the slave should be estimated justly, and he is to be
allowed to work and earn the amount that will manumit him (without
overburdening him)".

Volume 3, Book 44, Number 673:
Narrated An-Nu'man bin Bashir:
The Prophet said, "The example of the person abiding by Allah's order and
restrictions in comparison to those who violate them is like the example of
those persons who drew lots for their seats in a boat. Some of them got
seats in the upper part, and the others in the lower. When the latter needed
water, they had to go up to bring water (and that troubled the others), so
they said, 'Let us make a hole in our share of the ship (and get water) saving
those who are above us from troubling them. So, if the people in the upper
part left the others do what they had suggested, all the people of the ship
would be destroyed, but if they prevented them, both parties would be
safe."
Volume 3, Book 44, Number 674:
Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair:
That he had asked 'Aisha about the meaning of the Statement of Allah: "If
you fear that you shall not Be able to deal justly With the orphan girls, then
Marry (Other) women of your choice Two or three or four." (4.3)
She said, "O my nephew! This is about the orphan girl who lives with her
guardian and shares his property. Her wealth and beauty may tempt him to
marry her without giving her an adequate Mahr (bridal-money) which might
have been given by another suitor. So, such guardians were forbidden to
marry such orphan girls unless they treated them justly and gave them the
most suitable Mahr; otherwise they were ordered to marry any other
woman." 'Aisha further said, "After that verse the people again asked the
Prophet (about the marriage with orphan 'girls), so Allah revealed the
following verses:-- 'They ask your instruction Concerning the women. Say:
Allah Instructs you about them And about what is Recited unto you In the
Book, concerning The orphan girls to whom You give not the prescribed
portions and yet whom you Desire to marry..." (4.127)
What is meant by Allah's Saying:-- 'And about what is Recited unto you is the
former verse which goes:-- 'If you fear that you shall not Be able to deal
justly With the orphan girls, then Marry (other) women of your choice.' (4.3)
'Aisha said, "Allah's saying in the other verse:--'Yet whom you desire to
marry' (4.127) means the desire of the guardian to marry an orphan girl
under his supervision when she has not much property or beauty (in which
case he should treat her justly). The guardians were forbidden to marry their
orphan girls possessing property and beauty without being just to them, as
they generally refrain from marrying them (when they are neither beautiful
nor wealthy)."

Volume 3, Book 44, Number 675:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet established the right of Shu'fa (i.e. Pre-emption) in joint
properties; but when the land is divided and the ways are demarcated, then
there is no pre-emption.

Volume 3, Book 44, Number 676:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "The right of pre-emption is valid in every joint property,
but when the land is divided and the way is demarcated, then there is no
right of pre-emption."

Volume 3, Book 44, Number 677:
Narrated Sulaiman bin Abu Muslim:
I asked Abu Minhal about money exchange from hand to hand. He said, "I
and a partner of mine bought something partly in cash and partly on credit."
Al-Bara' bin 'Azib passed by us and we asked about it. He replied, "I and my
partner Zaid bin Al-Arqam did the same and then went to the Prophet and
asked him about it. He said, 'Take what was from hand to hand and leave
what was on credit.' "

Volume 3, Book 44, Number 678:
Narrated Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle rented the land of Khaibar to the Jews on the condition that
they would work on it and cultivate it and take half of its yield.

Volume 3, Book 44, Number 679:
Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir:
that Allah's Apostle gave him some sheep to distribute among his
companions in order to sacrifice them and a kid was left. He told the
Prophet about it and the Prophet said to him, "Sacrifice it on your behalf."

Volume 3, Book 44, Number 680:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Hisham:
that his mother Zainab bint Humaid took him to the Prophet and said, "O
Allah's Apostle! Take the pledge of allegiance from him." But he said, "He is
still too young for the pledge," and passed his hand on his (i.e. 'Abdullah's)
head and invoked for Allah's blessing for him. Zuhra bin Ma'bad stated that
he used to go with his grandfather, 'Abdullah bin Hisham, to the market to
buy foodstuff. Ibn 'Umar and Ibn Az-Zubair would meet him and say to him,
"Be our partner, as the Prophet invoked Allah to bless you." So, he would be
their partner, and very often he would win a camel's load and send it home.

Volume 3, Book 44, Number 681:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "Whoever manumits his share o a jointly possessed slave,
it is imperative on him to manumit the slave completely if he has sufficient
money to pay the rest of its price which is to be estimated justly. He should
pay his partners their shares and release him (the freed one).

Volume 3, Book 44, Number 682:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Whoever manumits his share of a jointly possessed slave,
it is essential for him to manumit the slave completely if he has sufficient
money. Otherwise he should look for some work for the slave (to earn what
would enable him to emancipate himself), without overburdening him with
work."
Volume 3, Book 44, Number 683:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet (along with his companions) reached Mecca in the morning of
the fourth of Dhul-Hijja assuming Ihram for Hajj only. So when we arrived at
Mecca, the Prophet ordered us to change our intentions of the Ihram
for'Umra and that we could finish our Ihram after performing the 'Umra and
could go to our wives (for sexual intercourse). The people began talking
about that. Jabir said surprisingly, "Shall we go to Mina while semen is
dribbling from our male organs?" Jabir moved his hand while saying so.
When this news reached the Prophet he delivered a sermon and said, "I
have been informed that some peoples were saying so and so; By Allah I fear
Allah more than you do, and am more obedient to Him than you. If I had
known what I know now, I would not have brought the Hadi (sacrifice) with
me and had the Hadi not been with me, I would have finished the Ihram." At
that Suraqa bin Malik stood up and asked "O Allah's Apostle! Is this
permission for us only or is it forever?" The Prophet replied, "It is forever."
In the meantime 'Ali bin Abu Talib came from Yemen and was saying Labbaik
for what the Prophet has intended. (According to another man, 'Ali was
saying Labbaik for Hajj similar to Allah's Apostle's). The Prophet told him to
keep on the Ihram and let him share the Hadi with him.

Volume 3, Book 44, Number 684:
Narrated Abaya bin Rifaa:
My grandfather, Rafi bin Khadij said, "We were in the valley of Dhul-Hulaifa
of Tuhama in the company of the Prophet and had some camels and sheep
(of the booty). The people hurried (in slaughtering the animals) and put
their meat in the pots and started cooking. Allah's Apostle came and
ordered them to upset the pots, and distributed the booty considering one
camel as equal to ten sheep. One of the camels fled and the people had only
a few horses, so they got worried. (The camel was chased and) a man
slopped the camel by throwing an arrow at it. Allah's Apostle said, 'Some of
these animals are untamed like wild animals, so if anyone of them went out
of your control, then you should treat it as you have done now.' " My
grandfather said, "O Allah's Apostle! We fear that we may meet our enemy
tomorrow and we have no knives, could we slaughter the animals with
reeds?" The Prophet said, "Yes, or you can use what would make blood flow
(slaughter) and you can eat what is slaughtered and the Name of Allah is
mentioned at the time of slaughtering. But don't use teeth or fingernails (in
slaughtering). I will tell you why, as for teeth, they are bones, and fingernails
are used by Ethiopians for slaughtering. (See Hadith 668)
BOOK 45. MORTGAGING (685-692)
Volume 3, Book 45, Number 685:
Narrated Anas:
No doubt, the Prophet mortgaged his armor for barley grams. Once I took
barley bread with some dissolved fat on it to the Prophet and I heard him
saying, "The household of Muhammad did not possess except a Sa (of food
grain, barley, etc.) for both the morning and the evening meals although
they were nine houses."

Volume 3, Book 45, Number 686:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet bought some foodstuff on credit for a limited period and
mortgaged his armor for it.

Volume 3, Book 45, Number 687:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "Who would kill Ka'b bin Al-Ashraf as he has harmed
Allah and His Apostle ?" Muhammad bin Maslama (got up and) said, "I will
kill him." So, Muhammad bin Maslama went to Ka'b and said, "I want a loan
of one or two Wasqs of food grains." Ka'b said, "Mortgage your women to
me." Muhammad bin Maslama said, "How can we mortgage our women,
and you are the most handsome among the Arabs?" He said, "Then
mortgage your sons to me." Muhammad said, "How can we mortgage our
sons, as the people will abuse them for being mortgaged for one or two
Wasqs of food grains? It is shameful for us. But we will mortgage our arms
to you." So, Muhammad bin Maslama promised him that he would come to
him next time. They (Muhammad bin Maslama and his companions came to
him as promised and murdered him. Then they went to the Prophet and told
him about it.

Volume 3, Book 45, Number 688:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "One can ride the mortgaged animal because of what one
spends on it, and one can drink the milk of a milch animal as long as it is
mortgaged. "

Volume 3, Book 45, Number 689:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The mortgaged animal can be used for riding as long
as it is fed and the milk of the milch animal can be drunk according to what
one spend on it. The one who rides the animal or drinks its milk should
provide the expenditures."

Volume 3, Book 45, Number 690:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle bought some foodstuff from a Jew and mortgaged his armor
to him.

Volume 3, Book 45, Number 691:
Narrated Ibn Abu Mulaika:
I wrote a letter to Ibn 'Abbas and he wrote to me that the Prophet had given
the verdict that the defendant had to take an oath.
Volume 3, Book 45, Number 692:
Narrated Abu Wail:
Abdullah (bin Mas'ud) said, "Whoever took a false oath in order to grab
somebody's property will meet Allah while Allah will be angry with him."
Allah revealed the following verse to confirm that:--"Verily! Those who
purchase a small gain at the cost of Allah's covenant And their oaths...a
painful torment." (3.77)
Al-Ash'ath bin Qais came to us and asked as to what Abu Abdur-Rehman (i.e.
Ibn Mas'ud) was telling you." We related the story to him. On that he said,
"He has told the truth. This verse was revealed about me. I had some
dispute with another man regarding a well and we took the case before
Allah's Apostle. Allah's Apostle said (to me), "Produce two witnesses (to
support your claim); otherwise the defendant has the right to take an oath
(to refute your claim).' I said, 'The defendant would not mind to take a false
oath." Allah's Apostle then said, 'Whoever took a false oath in order to grab
someone else's property will meet Allah, Allah will be angry with him.' Allah
then revealed what Confirmed it." Al-Ash'ath then recited the following
Verse:--"Verily! Those who purchase a small gain at the cost of Allah's
covenant, And their oaths . . . (to) . . . they shall have a painful torment!'
(3.77) (See Hadith No. 546)
BOOK 46. MANUMISSION OF SLAVES (693-739)
Volume 3, Book 46, Number 693:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Whoever frees a Muslim slave, Allah will save all the parts
of his body from the (Hell) Fire as he has freed the body-parts of the slave."
Said bin Marjana said that he narrated that Hadith to 'Ali bin Al-Husain and
he freed his slave for whom 'Abdullah bin Ja'far had offered him ten
thousand Dirhams or one-thousand Dinars.

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 694:
Narrated Abu Dhar:
I asked the Prophet, "What is the best deed?" He replied, "To believe in Allah
and to fight for His Cause." I then asked, "What is the best kind of
manumission (of slaves)?" He replied, "The manumission of the most
expensive slave and the most beloved by his master." I said, "If I cannot
afford to do that?" He said, "Help the weak or do good for a person who
cannot work for himself." I said, "If I cannot do that?" He said, "Refrain from
harming others for this will be regarded as a charitable deed for your own
good."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 695:
Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr:
The Prophet ordered us to free slaves at the time of solar eclipses.

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 696:
Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr:
We were ordered to free slaves at the time of lunar eclipses.

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 697:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "Whoever manumits a slave owned by two masters,
should manumit him completely (not partially) if he is rich after having its
price evaluated."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 698:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever frees his share of a common slave and he has
sufficient money to free him completely, should let its price be estimated by
a just man and give his partners the price of their shares and manumit the
slave; otherwise (i.e. if he has not sufficient money) he manumits the slave
partially."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 699:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever manumits his share of a slave, then it is
essential for him to get that slave manumitted' completely as long as he has
the money to do so. If he has not sufficient money to pay the price of the
other shares (after the price of the slave is evaluated justly), the
manumitted manumits the slave partially in proportion to his share.

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 700:
Narrated 'Ubaidullah:
as above BRIEFLY.
Volume 3, Book 46, Number 701:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "He who manumits his share of a slave and has money
sufficient to free the remaining portion of that slave's price (justly
estimated) then he should manumit him (by giving the rest of his price to
the other co-owners)." Nafi' added, "Otherwise the slave is partially free."
Aiyub is not sure whether the last statement was said by Nafi' or it was a
part of the Hadith.

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 702:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
That he used to give his verdict regarding the male or female slaves owned
by more than one master, one of whom may manumit his share of the slave.
Ibn 'Umar used to say in such a case, "The manumitted should manumit the
slave completely if he has sufficient money to pay the rest of the price of
that slave (which is to be justly estimated) and the other share-holders are
to take the price of their shares and the slave is freed (released from
slavery)." Ibn 'Umar narrated this verdict from the Prophet.

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 703:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
that the Prophet said, "Whoever frees his portion of a (common) slave."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 704:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Whoever frees his portion of a common slave should free
the slave completely by paying the rest of his price from his money if he ha
enough money; otherwise the price of the slave is to be estimated and the
slave is to be helped to work without hardship till he pays the rest of his
price."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 705:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah has accepted my invocation to forgive what
whispers in the hearts of my followers, unless they put it to action or utter
it." (See Hadith No. 657 Vol. 8)

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 706:
Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:
The Prophet said, "The (reward of) deeds depend on intentions, and every
person will get the reward according to what he intends. So, whoever
migrated for Allah and His Apostle, then his migration will be for Allah and
His Apostle, and whoever migrated for worldly benefits or for marrying a
woman, then his migration will be for what he migrated for." (See Hadith
No. 1, Vol. 1)

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 707:
Narrated Qais:
When Abu Huraira accompanied by his slave set out intending to embrace
Islam they lost each other on the way. The slave then came while Abu
Huraira was sitting with the Prophet. The Prophet said, "O Abu Huraira! Your
slave has come back." Abu Huraira said, "Indeed, I would like you to witness
that I have manumitted him." That happened at the time when Abu Huraira
recited (the following poetic verse):-- 'What a long tedious tiresome night!
Nevertheless, it has delivered us From the land of Kufr (disbelief).
Volume 3, Book 46, Number 708:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
On my way to the Prophet I was reciting:-- 'What a long tedious tiresome
night! Nevertheless, it has saved us From the land of Kufr (disbelief).' I had a
slave who ran away from me on the way. When I went to the Prophet and
gave the pledge of allegiance for embracing Islam, the slave showed up
while I was still with the Prophet who remarked, "O Abu Huraira! Here is
your slave!" I said, "I manumit him for Allah's Sake," and so I freed him.

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 709:
Narrated Qais:
When Abu Huraira accompanied by his slave came intending to embrace
Islam, they lost each other on the way. (When the slave showed up) Abu
Huraira said (to the Prophet), "I make you witness that the slave is free for
Allah's Cause."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 710:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Utba bin Abi Waqqas authorized his brother Sad bin Abi Waqqas to take the
son of the slave-girl of Zam'a into his custody, telling him that the boy was
his own (illegal) son. When Allah's Apostle went (to Mecca) at the time of
the Conquest, Sad took the son of the slavegirl of Zam'a to Allah's Apostle
and also brought 'Abu bin Zam'a with him and said, "O Allah's Apostle! This
is the son of my brother 'Utba who authorized me to take him into my
custody." 'Abu bin Zam'a said, "O Allah's Apostle! He is my brother, the son
of Zam'a' slave-girl and he was born on his bed." Allah's Apostle looked at
the son of the slave-girl of Zam'a and noticed much resemblance (to 'Utba).
Allah's Apostle said, "It is for you, O 'Abu bin Zam'a as he was born on the
bed of your father." Allah's Apostle then told Sauda bint Zam'a to observe
veil in the presence of the boy as he noticed the boy's resemblance to 'Utba
and Sauda was the wife of the Prophet .

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 711:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
A man amongst us declared that his slave would be freed after his death.
The Prophet called for that slave and sold him. The slave died the same year.

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 712:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle forbade the selling or donating the Wala' of a freed slave.

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 713:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I bought Buraira but her masters put the condition that her Wala' would be
for them. I told the Prophet about it. He said (to me), "Manumit her as her
Wala' will be for the one who pays the price." So, I manumitted her. The
Prophet called Buraira and gave her the option of either staying with her
husband or leaving him. She said, "Even if he gave me so much money, I
would not stay with him," and so she preferred her freedom to her husband.

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 714:
Narrated Anas:
Some men of the Ansar asked for the permission of Allah's Apostle and said,
"Allow us to give up the ransom from our nephew Al-'Abbas. The Prophet
said (to them), "Do not leave (even) a Dirham (of his ransom)."
Volume 3, Book 46, Number 715:
Narrated Hisham:
My father told me that Hakim bin Hizam manumitted one-hundred slaves in
the pre-lslamic period of ignorance and slaughtered one-hundred camels
(and distributed them in charity). When he embraced Islam he again
slaughtered one-hundred camels and manumitted one-hundred slaves.
Hakim said, "I asked Allah's Apostle, 'O Allah's Apostle! What do you think
about some good deeds I used to practice in the prelslamic period of
ignorance regarding them as deeds of righteousness?' Allah's Apostle said,
"You have embraced Islam along with all those good deeds you did."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 716:
Narrated Marwan and Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:
When the delegates of the tribe of Hawazin came to the Prophet and they
requested him to return their properties and captives. The Prophet stood up
and said to them, "I have other people with me in this matter (as you see)
and the most beloved statement to me is the true one; you may choose
either the properties or the prisoners as I have delayed their distribution."
The Prophet had waited for them for more than ten days since his arrival
from Ta'if. So, when it became evident to them that the Prophet was not
going to return them except one of the two, they said, "We choose our
prisoners." The Prophet got up amongst the people and glorified and
praised Allah as He deserved and said, "Then after, these brethren of yours
have come to us with repentance, and I see it logical to return them the
captives. So, whoever amongst you likes to do that as a favor, then he can
do it, and whoever of you likes to stick to his share till we recompense him
from the very first war booty which Allah will give us, then he can do so (i.e.
give up the present captives)." The people unanimously said, "We do that
(return the captives) willingly." The Prophet said, "We do not know which of
you has agreed to it and which have not, so go back and let your leaders
forward us your decision." So, all the people then went back and discussed
the matter with their leaders who returned and informed the Prophet that
all the people had willingly given their consent to return the captives. This is
what has reached us about the captives of Hawazin. Narrated Anas that
'Abbas said to the Prophet, "I paid for my ransom and Aqil's ransom."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 717:
Narrated Ibn Aun:
I wrote a letter to Nafi and Nafi wrote in reply to my letter that the Prophet
had suddenly attacked Bani Mustaliq without warning while they were
heedless and their cattle were being watered at the places of water. Their
fighting men were killed and their women and children were taken as
captives; the Prophet got Juwairiya on that day. Nafi said that Ibn 'Umar had
told him the above narration and that Ibn 'Umar was in that army.

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 718:
Narrated Ibn Muhairiz:
I saw Abu Said and asked him about coitus interruptus. Abu Said said, "We
went with Allah's Apostle, in the Ghazwa of Barli Al-Mustaliq and we
captured some of the 'Arabs as captives, and the long separation from our
wives was pressing us hard and we wanted to practice coitus interruptus.
We asked Allah's Apostle (whether it was permissible). He said, "It is better
for you not to do so. No soul, (that which Allah has) destined to exist, up to
the Day of Resurrection, but will definitely come, into existence."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 719:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I have loved the people of the tribe of Bani Tamim ever since I heard, three
things, Allah's Apostle said about them. I heard him saying, These people (of
the tribe of Bani Tamim) would stand firm against Ad-Dajjal." When the
Sadaqat (gifts of charity) from that tribe came, Allah's Apostle said, "These
are the Sadaqat (i.e. charitable gifts) of our folk." 'Aisha had a slave-girl from
that tribe, and the Prophet said to 'Aisha, "Manumit her as she is a
descendant of Ishmael (the Prophet)."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 720:
Narrated Abu Musa:
Allah's Apostle said, "He who has a slave-girl and educates and treats her
nicely and then manumits and marries her, will get a double reward."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 721:
Narrated Al-Ma'rur bin Suwaid:
I saw Abu Dhar Al-Ghifari wearing a cloak, and his slave, too, was wearing a
cloak. We asked him about that (i.e. how both were wearing similar cloaks).
He replied, "Once I abused a man and he complained of me to the Prophet .
The Prophet asked me, 'Did you abuse him by slighting his mother?' He
added, 'Your slaves are your brethren upon whom Allah has given you
authority. So, if one has one's brethren under one's control, one should feed
them with the like of what one eats and clothe them with the like of what
one wears. You should not overburden them with what they cannot bear,
and if you do so, help them (in their hard job)."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 722:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "If a slave is honest and faithful to his master and
worships his Lord (Allah) in a perfect manner, he will get a double reward."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 723:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari:
The Prophet said, "He who has a slave-girl and teaches her good manners
and improves her education and then manumits and marries her, will get a
double reward; and any slave who observes Allah's right and his master's
right will get a double reward."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 724:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "A pious slave gets a double reward." Abu Huraira
added: By Him in Whose Hands my soul is but for Jihad (i.e. holy battles),
Hajj, and my duty to serve my mother, I would have loved to die as a slave.

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 725:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Goodness and comfort are for him who worships his Lord
in a perfect manner and serves his master sincerely."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 726:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "If a slave serves his Saiyid (i.e. master) sincerely and
worships his Lord (Allah) perfectly, he will get a double reward."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 727:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "The Mamluk (slave) who worships his Lord in a perfect
manner, and is dutiful, sincere and obedient to his Saiyid (master), will get a
double reward."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 728:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "You should not say, 'Feed your lord (Rabbaka), help your
lord in performing ablution, or give water to your lord, but should say, 'my
master (e.g. Feed your master instead of lord etc.) (Saiyidi), or my guardian
(Maulai), and one should not say, my slave (Abdi), or my girl-slave (Amati),
but should say, my lad (Fatai), my lass (Fatati), and 'my boy (Ghulami)."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 729:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "If one manumits his share of a common slave (Abd), and
he has money sufficient to free the remaining portion of the price of the
slave (justly estimated), then he should free the slave completely by paying
the rest of his price; otherwise the slave is freed partly. "

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 730:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "Everyone of you is a guardian and is responsible for his
charges. The ruler who has authority over people, is a guardian and is
responsible for them, a man is a guardian of his family and is responsible for
them; a woman is a guardian of her husband's house and children and is
responsible for them; a slave ('Abu) is a guardian of his master's property
and is responsible for it; so all of you are guardians and are responsible for
your charges."
Volume 3, Book 46, Number 731:
Narrated Abu Huraira and Zaid bin Khalid:
The Prophet said, "If a slave-girl (Ama) commits illegal sexual intercourse,
scourge her; if she does it again, scourge her again; if she repeats it, scourge
her again." The narrator added that on the third or the fourth offence, the
Prophet said, "Sell her even for a hair rope."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 732:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "When your servant brings your meals to you then if he
does not let him sit and share the meals, then he should at least give him a
mouthful or two mouthfuls of that meal or a meal or two meals, as he has
prepared it."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 733:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
That he heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Everyone of you is a guardian and is
responsible for his charge; the ruler is a guardian and is responsible for his
subjects; the man is a guardian in his family and responsible for his charges;
a woman is a guardian of her husband's house and responsible for her
charges; and the servant is a guardian of his master's property and is
responsible for his charge." I definitely heard the above from the Prophet
and think that the Prophet also said, "A man is a guardian of his father's
property and responsible for his charges; so everyone of you is a guardian
and responsible for his charges."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 734:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "If somebody fights (or beats somebody) then he should
avoid the face."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 735:
Narrated 'Urwa:
That 'Aisha told him that Buraira came to seek her help in her writing of
emancipation (for a certain sum) and that time she had not paid anything of
it. 'Aisha said to her, "Go back to your masters, and if they agree that I will
pay the amount of your writing of emancipation and get your Wala', I will do
so." Buraira informed her masters of that but they refused and said, "If she
(i.e. 'Aisha) is seeking Allah's reward, then she can do so, but your Wala' will
be for us." 'Aisha mentioned that to Allah's Apostle who said to her, "Buy
and manumit her, as the Wala' is for the liberator." Allah's Apostle then got
up and said, "What about the people who stipulate conditions which are not
present in Allah's Laws? Whoever imposes conditions which are not present
in Allah's Laws, then those conditions will be invalid, even if he imposed
these conditions a hundred times. Allah's conditions (Laws) are the truth
and are more solid."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 736:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Aisha wanted to buy a slave-girl in order to manumit her. The girl's masters
stipulated that her Wala' would be for them. Allah's Apostle said (to 'Aisha),
"What they stipulate should not stop you, for the Wala' is for the liberator."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 737:
Narrated Aisha:
Buraira came (to 'Aisha) and said, "I have made a contract of emancipation
with my masters for nine Uqiyas (of gold) to be paid in yearly installments.
Therefore, I seek your help." 'Aisha said, "If your masters agree, I will pay
them the sum at once and free you on condition that your Wala' will be for
me." Buraira went to her masters but they refused that offer. She (came
back) and said, "I presented to them the offer but they refused, unless the
Wala' was for them." Allah's Apostle heard of that and asked me about it,
and I told him about it. On that he said, "Buy and manumit her and stipulate
that the Wala' should be for you, as Wala' is for the liberator." 'Aisha added,
"Allah's Apostle then got up amongst the people, Glorified and Praised
Allah, and said, 'Then after: What about some people who impose
conditions which are not present in Allah's Laws? So, any condition which is
not present in Allah's Laws is invalid even if they were one-hundred
conditions. Allah's ordinance is the truth, and Allah's condition is stronger
and more solid. Why do some men from you say, O so-and-so! manumit the
slave but the Wala will be for me? Verily, the Wala is for the liberator."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 738:
Narrated Amra bint 'AbdurRahman:
Buraira went to Aisha, the mother of the faithful believers to seek her help
in her emancipation Aisha said to her, "If your masters agree, I will pay them
your price in a lump sum and manumit you." Buraira mentioned that offer to
her masters but they refused to sell her unless the Wala' was for them.
'Aisha told Allah's Apostle about it. He said, "Buy and manumit her as the
Wala' is for the liberator."

Volume 3, Book 46, Number 739:
Narrated 'Abdul Wahid bin Aiman:
I went to 'Aisha and said, "I was the slave of Utba bin Abu Lahab. "Utba died
and his sons became my masters who sold me to Ibn Abu Amr who
manumitted me. The sons of 'Utba stipulated that my Wala' should be for
them." 'Aisha said, "Buraira came to me and she was given the writing of
emancipation by her masters and she asked me to buy and manumit her. I
agreed to it, but Buraira told me that her masters would not sell her unless
her Wala' was for them." 'Aisha said, "I am not in need of that." When the
Prophet heard that, or he was told about it, he asked 'Aisha about it. 'Aisha
mentioned what Buraira had told her. The Prophet said, "Buy and manumit
her and let them stipulate whatever they like." So, 'Aisha bought and
manumitted her and her masters stipulated that her Wala' should be for
them." The Prophet;, said, "The Wala' will be for the liberator even if they
stipulated a hundred conditions."
BOOK 47. GIFTS (740-804)
Volume 3, Book 47, Number 740:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "O Muslim women! None of you should look down upon
the gift sent by her she-neighbour even if it were the trotters of the sheep
(fleshless part of legs)."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 741:
Narrated Urwa:
Aisha said to me, "O my nephew! We used to see the crescent, and then the
crescent and then the crescent in this way we saw three crescents in two
months and no fire (for cooking) used to be made in the houses of Allah's
Apostle. I said, "O my aunt! Then what use to sustain you?" 'Aisha said, "The
two black things: dates and water, our neighbors from Ansar had some
Manarh and they used to present Allah's Apostle some of their milk and he
used to make us drink."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 742:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "I shall accept the invitation even if I were invited to a
meal of a sheep's trotter, and I shall accept the gift even if it were an arm or
a trotter of a sheep."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 743:
Narrated Sahl:
The Prophet sent for a woman from the emigrants and she had a slave who
was a carpenter. The Prophet said to her "Order your slave to prepare the
wood (pieces) for the pulpit." So, she ordered her slave who went and cut
the wood from the tamarisk and prepared the pulpit, for the Prophet. When
he finished the pulpit, the woman informed the Prophet that it had been
finished. The Prophet asked her to send that pulpit to him, so they brought
it. The Prophet lifted it and placed it at the place in which you see now."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 744:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Qatada Al-Aslami:
That his father said, "One day I was sitting with some of the Prophet's
companions on the way to Mecca. Allah's Apostle was ahead of us. All of my
companions were in the state of Ihram while I was a non-Muhrim. They saw
an onager while I was busy repairing my shoes, so they did not tell me about
it but they wished I had seen it. By chance I looked up and saw it. So, I
turned to the horse, saddled it and rode on it, forgetting to take the spear
and the whip. I asked them if they could hand over to me the whip and the
spear but they said, 'No, by Allah, we shall not help you in that in any way.' I
became angry and got down from the horse, picked up both the things and
rode the horse again. I attacked the onager and slaughtered it, and brought
it (after it had been dead). They took it (cooked some of it) and started
eating it, but they doubted whether it was allowed for them to eat it or not,
as they were in the state of Ihram. So, we proceeded and I hid with me one
of its fore-legs. When we met Allah's Apostle and asked him about the case,
he asked, 'Do you have a portion of it with you?' I replied in the affirmative
and gave him that fleshy fore-leg which he ate completely while he was in
the state of Ihram .

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 745:
Narrated Anas:
Once Allah's Apostle visited us in this house of ours and asked for something
to drink. We milked one of our sheep and mixed it with water from this well
of ours and gave it to him. Abu Bakr was sitting on his left side and 'Umar in
front of him and a bedouin on his right side. When Allah's Apostle finished,
'Umar said to Allah's Apostle "Here is Abu Bakr." But Allah's Apostle gave
the remaining milk to the bedouin and said twice, "The (persons on the)
right side! So, start from the right side." Anas added, "It is a Sunna (the
Prophet's traditions)" and repeated it thrice.

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 746:
Narrated Anas:
We chased a rabbit at Mar-al-Zahran and the people ran after it but were
exhausted. I overpowered and caught it, and gave it to Abu Talha who
slaughtered it and sent its hip or two thighs to Allah's Apostle. (The narrator
confirms that he sent two thighs). The Prophet accepted that. (The subnarrator asked Anas, "Did the Prophet; eat from it?" Anas replied, "He ate
from it.")

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 747:
Narrated As-Sa'b bin Jaththama:
An onager was presented to Allah's Apostle at the place called Al-Abwa' or
Waddan, but Allah's Apostle rejected it. When the Prophet noticed the signs
of sorrow on the giver's face he said, "We have not rejected your gift, but
we are in the state of Ihram." (i.e. if we were not in a state of Ihram we
would have accepted your gift, Fateh-al-Bari page 130, Vol. 6)

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 748:
Narrated Aisha:
The people used to look forward for the days of my ('Aisha's) turn to send
gifts to Allah's Apostle in order to please him.

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 749:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
Ibn Abbas said: Um Hufaid, Ibn 'Abbas's aunt sent some dried yogurt (butter
free), ghee (butter) and a mastigar to the Prophet as a gift. The Prophet ate
the dried yogurt and butter but left the mastigar because he disliked it. Ibn
'Abbas said, "The mastigar was eaten at the table of Allah's Apostle and if it
had been illegal to eat, it could not have been eaten at the table of Allah's
Apostle."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 750:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Whenever a meal was brought to Allah's Apostle, he would ask whether it
was a gift or Sadaqa (something given in charity). If he was told that it was
Sadaqa, he would tell his companions to eat it, but if it was a gift, he would
hurry to share it with them.

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 751:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Some meat was brought to the Prophet and it was said that the meat had
been given in charity to Buraira. He said, "It was Sadaqa for Buraira but a gift
for us."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 752:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I intended to buy Buraira but her masters stipulated that her Wala should be
for them. When the Prophet was told about it, he said to me, "Buy and
manumit her, as the Wala' is for the liberator." Once Buraira was given some
meat, and the Prophet asked, "What is this?" I said, "It has been given to
Buraira in charity." He said, "It is sadaqa for her but a gift for us." Buraira
was given the option (to stay with her husband or to part with him).
AbdurRahman (a sub-narrator) wondered, "Was her husband a slave or a
free man?" Shu'ba (another sub-narrator) said, "I asked 'Abdur-Rahman
whether her husband was a slave or a free man. He replied that he did not
know whether he was a slave or a free man."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 753:
Narrated Um 'Atiyya:
Once the Prophet went to 'Aisha and asked her whether she had something
(to eat). She said that she had nothing except the mutton which Um 'Atiyya
had sent to (Buraira) in charity. The Prophet said that it had reached its
destination (i.e. it is no longer an object of charity.)

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 754:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The people used to send gifts to the Prophet on the day of my turn. Um
Salama said: "My companions (the wives of the Prophet Other than Aisha)
gathered and they complained about it. So I informed the Prophet about it
on their behalf, but he remained silent.

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 755:
Narrated 'Urwa from 'Aisha:
The wives of Allah's Apostle were in two groups. One group consisted of
'Aisha, Hafsa, Safiyya and Sauda; and the other group consisted of Um
Salama and the other wives of Allah's Apostle. The Muslims knew that
Allah's Apostle loved 'Aisha, so if any of them had a gift and wished to give
to Allah's Apostle, he would delay it, till Allah's Apostle had come to 'Aisha's
home and then he would send his gift to Allah's Apostle in her home. The
group of Um Salama discussed the matter together and decided that Um
Salama should request Allah's Apostle to tell the people to send their gifts
to him in whatever wife's house he was. Um Salama told Allah's Apostle of
what they had said, but he did not reply. Then they (those wives) asked Um
Salama about it. She said, "He did not say anything to me." They asked her
to talk to him again. She talked to him again when she met him on her day,
but he gave no reply. When they asked her, she replied that he had given no
reply. They said to her, "Talk to him till he gives you a reply." When it was
her turn, she talked to him again. He then said to her, "Do not hurt me
regarding Aisha, as the Divine Inspirations do not come to me on any of the
beds except that of Aisha." On that Um Salama said, "I repent to Allah for
hurting you." Then the group of Um Salama called Fatima, the daughter of
Allah's Apostle and sent her to Allah's Apostle to say to him, "Your wives
request to treat them and the daughter of Abu Bakr on equal terms." Then
Fatima conveyed the message to him. The Prophet said, "O my daughter!
Don't you love whom I love?" She replied in the affirmative and returned
and told them of the situation. They requested her to go to him again but
she refused. They then sent Zainab bint Jahsh who went to him and used
harsh words saying, "Your wives request you to treat them and the
daughter of Ibn Abu Quhafa on equal terms." On that she raised her voice
and abused 'Aisha to her face so much so that Allah's Apostle looked at
'Aisha to see whether she would retort. 'Aisha started replying to Zainab till
she silenced her. The Prophet then looked at 'Aisha and said, "She is really
the daughter of Abu Bakr."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 756:
Narrated 'Azra bin Thabit Al-Ansari:
When I went to Thumama bin 'Abdullah, he gave me some perfume and said
that Anas would not reject the gifts of perfume. Anas said: The Prophet used
not to reject the gifts of perfume.

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 757:
Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama and Marwan:
When the delegates of the tribe of Hawazin came to the Prophet he stood
up amongst the people, Glorified and Praised Allah as He deserved, and said,
"Then after: Your brethren have come to you with repentance and I see it
logical to return to them their captives; so whoever amongst you likes to do
that as a favor, then he can do it, and whoever of you like to stick to his
share till we give him his right from the very first Fai (war booty) (1) which
Allah will bestow on us, then (he can do so)." The people replied, "We do
that (to return the captives) willingly as a favor for your sake."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 758:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostles used to accept gifts and used to give something in return.

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 759:
Narrated An-Nu'man bin Bashir:
that his father took him to Allah's Apostle and said, "I have given this son of
mine a slave." The Prophet asked, "Have you given all your sons the like?"
He replied in the negative. The Prophet said, "Take back your gift then."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 760:
Narrated 'Amir:
I heard An-Nu'man bin Bashir on the pulpit saying, "My father gave me a gift
but 'Amra bint Rawaha (my mother) said that she would not agree to it
unless he made Allah's Apostle as a witness to it. So, my father went to
Allah's Apostle and said, 'I have given a gift to my son from 'Amra bint
Rawaha, but she ordered me to make you as a witness to it, O Allah's
Apostle!' Allah's Apostle asked, 'Have you given (the like of it) to everyone
of your sons?' He replied in the negative. Allah's Apostle said, 'Be afraid of
Allah, and be just to your children.' My father then returned and took back
his gift."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 761:
Narrated Az-Zuhari:
Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah told me that 'Aisha had said, "When the Prophet
became sick and his condition became serious, he requested his wives to
allow him to be treated in my house, and they allowed him. He came out
leaning on two men while his feet were dragging on the ground. He was
walking between Al-'Abbas and another man." 'Ubaidullah said, "When I
informed Ibn 'Abbas of what 'Aisha had said, he asked me whether I knew
who was the second man whom 'Aisha had not named. I replied in the
negative. He said, 'He was 'Ali bin Abi Talib."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 762:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: The Prophet said, "One who takes back his gift (which
he has already given) is like a dog that swallows its vomit."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 763:
Narrated Asma:
Once I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have no property except what has been
given to me by Az-Zubair (i.e. her husband). May I give in charity?" The
Prophet said, "Give in charity and do not withhold it; otherwise Allah will
withhold it back from you . "

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 764:
Narrated Asma:
Allah's Apostle said, "Give (in charity) and do not give reluctantly lest Allah
should give you in a limited amount; and do not withhold your money lest
Allah should withhold it from you."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 765:
Narrated Kurib:
the freed slave of Ibn 'Abbas, that Maimuna bint Al-Harith told him that she
manumitted a slave-girl without taking the permission of the Prophet. On
the day when it was her turn to be with the Prophet, she said, "Do you
know, O Allah's Apostle, that I have manumitted my slave-girl?" He said,
"Have you really?" She replied in the affirmative. He said, "You would have
got more reward if you had given her (i.e. the slave-girl) to one of your
maternal uncles."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 766:
Narrated Aisha:
Whenever Allah's Apostle wanted to go on a journey, he would draw lots as
to which of his wives would accompany him. He would take her whose
name came out. He used to fix for each of them a day and a night. But Sauda
bint Zam'a gave up her (turn) day and night to 'Aisha, the wife of the
Prophet in order to seek the pleasure of Allah's Apostle (by that action).

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 767:
Narrated Aisha:
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have two neighbors; which of them should I give
a gift to?" The Prophet said, "(Give) to the one whose door is nearer to you."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 768:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
That he heard As-Sa'b bin Jaththama Al-Laithi, who was one of the
companions of the Prophet, saying that he gave the meat of an onager to
Allah's Apostle while he was at a place called Al-Abwa' or Waddan, and was
in a state of Ihram. The Prophet did not accept it. When the Prophet saw the
signs of sorrow on As-Sa'b's face because of not accepting his present, he
said (to him), "We are not returning your present, but we are in the state of
Ihram." (See Hadith No. 747)

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 769:
Narrated Abu Humaid Al-Sa'idi:
The Prophet appointed a man from the tribe of Al-Azd, called Ibn 'Utbiyya
for collecting the Zakat. When he returned he said, "This (i.e. the Zakat) is
for you and this has been given to my as a present." The Prophet said, "Why
hadn't he stayed in his father's or mother's house to see whether he would
be given presents or not? By Him in Whose Hands my life is, whoever takes
something from the resources of the Zakat (unlawfully) will be carrying it on
his neck on the Day of Resurrection; if it be a camel, it will be grunting; if a
cow, it will be mooing; and if a sheep, it will be bleating." The Prophet then
raised his hands till we saw the whiteness of his armpits, and he said thrice,
"O Allah! Haven't I conveyed Your Message (to them)?"

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 770:
Narrated Jabir:
The Prophet said to me, "I will give you so much (the Prophet pointed thrice
with his hands) when funds of Bahrain will come to me." But the Prophet
died before the money reached him. (When it came) Abu Bakr ordered an
announcer to announce that whoever had a money claim on the Prophet or
was promised to be given something, should come to Abu Bakr. I went to
Abu Bakr and told him that the Prophet had promised to give me so much.
On that Abu Bakr gave me three handfuls (of money).

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 771:
Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:
Allah's Apostle distributed some cloaks but did not give anything thereof to
Makhrama. Makhrama said (to me), "O son! accompany me to Allah's
Apostle." When I went with him, he said, "Call him to me." I called him (i.e.
the Prophet ) for my father. He came out wearing one of those cloaks and
said, "We kept this (cloak) for you, (Makhrama)." Makhrama looked at the
cloak and said, "Makhrama is pleased," (or the Prophet said), "Is Makhrama
pleased?"

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 772:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man came to Allah's Apostle and said, "I am ruined." The Prophet asked,
"What do you mean?" He said, "I had a sexual intercourse with my wife
during Ramadan (while fasting)." The Prophet asked him, "Can you manumit
a slave?" He replied in the negative. He then asked him, "Can you fast for
two successive months continuously" He replied in the negative. The
Prophet then asked him, "Can you feed sixty poor persons?" He replied in
the negative. In the meantime an Ansari came with a basket full of dates.
The Prophet said to the man, "Take it and give it in charity (as an expiation
of your sin)." The man said "Should I give it to some people who are poorer
than we O Allah's Apostle? By Him Who has sent you with the Truth, there is
no family between Medina's two mountains poorer than we." Allah's
Apostle told him to take it and provide his family with it."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 773:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
My father was martyred on the day (of the battle) of Uhud and his creditors
demanded the debt back in a harsh manner. So I went to Allah's Apostle and
informed him of that, he asked them to accept the fruits of my garden and
excuse my father, but they refused. So, Allah's Apostle did not give them the
fruits, nor did he cut them and distribute them among them, but said, "I will
come to you tomorrow morning." So, he came to us the next morning and
walked about in between the date-palms and invoked Allah to bless their
fruits. I plucked the fruits and gave back all the rights of the creditors in full,
and a lot of fruits were left for us. Then I went to Allah's Apostle, who was
sitting, and informed him about what happened. Allah's Apostle told 'Umar,
who was sitting there, to listen to the story. 'Umar said, "Don't we know
that you are Allah's Apostle? By Allah! you are Allah's Apostle!"

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 774:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
A drink (milk mixed with water) was brought to the Prophet who drank
some of it while a boy was sitting on his right and old men on his left. The
Prophet said to the boy, "If you permit me, I'll give (the rest of the drink to)
these old men first." The boy said, "I will not give preference to any one
over me as regards my share from you, O Allah's Apostle!" The Prophet then
put that container in the boy's hand. (See Hadith No. 541).

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 775:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
I sold a camel to the Prophet on one of the journeys. When we reached
Medina, he ordered me to go to the Mosque and offer two Rakat. Then he
weighed for me (the price of the camel in gold) and gave an extra amount
over it. A part of it remained with me till it was taken by the army of Sham
on the day of Harra."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 776:
Narrated Shal bin Sad:
A drink (of milk and water) was brought to Allah's Apostle while a boy was
sitting on his right side and old men were sitting on his left side. He asked
the boy, "Will you allow me to give it to these (people)?" The boy said, "No,
by Allah, I will not allow anyone to take my right from you." Then the
Prophet put the bowl in the boy's hand.

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 777:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle owed a man some debt (and that man demanded it very
harshly). The companions of the Prophet wanted to harm him, but the
Prophet said to them, "Leave him, as the creditor has the right to speak
harshly." He then added, "Buy (a camel) of the same age and give it to him."
They said, "We cannot get except a camel of an older age than that of his."
He said, "Buy it and give it to him, as the best amongst you is he who pays
back his debt in the most handsome way.'

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 778:
Narrated Marwan bin Al-Hakam and Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:
When the delegates of the tribe of Hawazin came to the Prophet they
requested him to return their property and their captives. He said to them,
"This concerns also other people along with me as you see, and the best
statement to me is the true one, so you may choose one of two alternatives;
either the captives or the property and (I have not distributed the booty for)
I have been waiting for you."
When the Prophet had returned from Ta'if, he waited for them for more
than ten nights. When they came to know that the Prophet would not
return except one of the two, they chose their captives. The Prophet then
stood up amongst the Muslims, Glorified and Praised Allah as He deserved,
and then said, "Then after: These brothers of yours have come to you with
repentance and I see it proper to return their captives, so whoever amongst
you likes to do that as a favor, then he can do it, and whoever of you wants
to stick to his share till we pay him from the very first Fai (i.e. war booty)
which Allah will give us, then he can do so." The people said, "We return
(the captives) to them willingly as a favor, O Allah's Apostle!" The Prophet
said, "I do not know who of you has given his consent and who has not; so
go back and your leaders may present your decision to me." The people
went away, and their leaders discussed the matter with them, and then
came to the Prophet to tell him that all of them had given their consent (to
return the captives) willingly. (Az-Zuhn, the sub-narrator said, "This is what
we know about the captives, of Hawazin.")

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 779:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: That the people sitting with that person will be his coowners. But this report is not confirmed by an authentic narration. (Refer to
Hadith 778)

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 780:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet took a camel of special age from somebody on credit. Its owner
came and demanded it back (harshly). The Prophet said, "No doubt, he who
has a right, can demand it." Then the Prophet gave him an older camel than
his camel and said, "The best amongst you is he who repays his debts in the
most handsome way."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 781:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
That he was in the company of the Prophet on a journey, riding a
troublesome camel belonging to 'Umar. The camel used to go ahead of the
Prophet, so Ibn 'Umar's father would say, "O 'Abdullah! No one should go
ahead of the Prophet." The Prophet said to him, "Sell it to me." 'Umar said
to the Prophet "It is for you." So, he bought it and said, "O 'Abdullah! It is for
you, and you can do with it what you like."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 782:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:
Umar bin Al-Khattab saw a silken dress (cloak) being sold at the gate of the
Mosque and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Would that you buy it and wear it on
Fridays and when the delegates come to you!" Allah's Apostle said, "This is
worn by the one who will have no share in the Hereafter." Later on some silk
dresses were brought and Allah's Apostle sent one of them to 'Umar. 'Umar
said, "How do you give me this to wear while you said what you said about
the dress of 'Utarid?" Allah's Apostle said, "I have not given it to you to
wear." So, 'Umar gave it to a pagan brother of his in Mecca.

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 783:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
Once the Prophet went to the house of Fatima but did not enter it. 'Ali came
and she told him about that. When 'All asked the Prophet about it, he said,
"I saw a (multi-colored) decorated curtain on her door. I am not interested
in worldly things." 'Ali went to Fatima and told her about it. Fatima said, "I
am ready to dispense with it in the way he suggests." The Prophet ordered
her to send it to such-and-such needy people. "

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 784:
Narrated 'Ali:
The Prophet gave me a silken dress as a gift and I wore it. When I saw the
signs of anger on his face, I cut it into pieces and distributed it among my
wives."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 785:
Narrated Anas:
A Jubba (i.e. cloak) made of thick silken cloth was presented to the Prophet.
The Prophet used to forbid people to wear silk. So, the people were pleased
to see it. The Prophet said, "By Him in Whose Hands Muhammad's soul is,
the handkerchiefs of Sad bin Mu'adh in Paradise are better than this." Anas
added, "The present was sent to the Prophet by Ukaidir (a Christian) from
Dauma."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 786:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
A Jewess brought a poisoned (cooked) sheep for the Prophet who ate from
it. She was brought to the Prophet and he was asked, "Shall we kill her?" He
said, "No." I continued to see the effect of the poison on the palate of the
mouth of Allah's Apostle .

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 787:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr:
We were one-hundred and thirty persons accompanying the Prophet who
asked us whether anyone of us had food. There was a man who had about a
Sa of wheat which was mixed with water then. A very tall pagan came
driving sheep. The Prophet asked him, "Will you sell us (a sheep) or give it as
a present?" He said, "I will sell you (a sheep)." The Prophet bought a sheep
and it was slaughtered. The Prophet ordered that its liver and other
abdominal organs be roasted. By Allah, the Prophet gave every person of
the one-hundred-and-thirty a piece of that; he gave all those of them who
were present; and kept the shares of those who were absent.The Prophet
then put its meat in two huge basins and all of them ate to their fill, and
even then more food was left in the two basins which were carried on the
camel (or said something like it).

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 788:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Umar saw a silken cloak over a man for sale and requested the Prophet to
buy it in order to wear it on Fridays and while meeting delegates. The
Prophet said, "This is worn by the one who will have no share in the
Hereafter." Later on Allah's Apostle got some silken cloaks similar to that
one, and he sent one to 'Umar. 'Umar said to the Prophet "How can I wear
it, while you said about it what you said?" The Prophet said, "I have not
given it to you to wear, but to sell or to give to someone else." So, 'Umar
sent it to his brother at Mecca before he embraced Islam.

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 789:
Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr:
My mother came to me during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle and she was a
pagan. I said to Allah's Apostle (seeking his verdict), "My mother has come
to me and she desires to receive a reward from me, shall I keep good
relations with her?" The Prophet said, "Yes, keep good relation with her. "
Volume 3, Book 47, Number 790:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "He who takes back his present is like him who swallows
his vomit."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 791:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "The bad example is not for us. He who takes back his
present is like a dog that swallows back its vomit."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 792:
Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:
I gave a horse in Allah's Cause. The person to whom it was given, did not
look after it. I intended to buy it from him, thinking that he would sell it
cheap. When I asked the Prophet he said, "Don't buy it, even if he gives it to
you for one Dirham, as the person who takes back what he has given in
charity, is like a dog that swallows back its vomit."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 793:
Narrated Jabir: The Prophet gave the verdict that 'Umra is for the one to
whom it is presented.

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 794:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Umra is permissible." Ata said, "Jabir narrated the same
to me from the Prophet."
Volume 3, Book 47, Number 795:
Narrated Anas:
Once the people of Medina were frightened, so the Prophet borrowed a
horse from Abu Talha called Al-Mandub, and rode it. When he came back he
said, "We have not seen anything (to be afraid of), but the horse was very
fast (having an energy as inexhaustible as the water of the sea)."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 796:
Narrated Aiman:
I went to 'Aisha and she was wearing a coarse dress costing five Dirhams.
'Aisha said, "Look up and see my slave-girl who refuses to wear it in the
house though during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle I had a similar dress
which no woman desiring to appear elegant (before her husband) failed to
borrow from me."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 797:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "What a good Maniha (the she-camel which has
recently given birth and which gives profuse milk) is, and (what a good
Maniha) (the sheep which gives profuse milk, a bowl in the morning and
another in the evening) is!"

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 798:
Narrated Malik:
Maniha is a good deed of charity.
Volume 3, Book 47, Number 799:
Narrated Ibn Shihab Az-Zuhri:
Anas bin Malik said, "When the emigrants came Medina, they had nothing
whereas the Ansar had land and property. The Ansar gave them their land
on condition that the emigrants would give them half the yearly yield and
work on the land and provide the necessaries for cultivation." His (i.e. Anas's
mother who was also the mother of 'Abdullah bin Abu Talha, gave some
date-palms to Allah' Apostle who gave them to his freed slave-girl (Um
Aiman) who was also the mother of Usama bin Zaid. When the Prophet
finished from the fighting against the people of Khaibar and returned to
Medina, the emigrants returned to the Ansar the fruit gifts which the Ansar
had given them. The Prophet also returned to Anas's mother the datepallms. Allah's Apostle gave Um Aiman other trees from his garden in lieu of
the old gift.

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 800:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
That Allah's Apostle said, "There are forty virtuous deeds and the best of
them is the Maniha of a she-goat, and anyone who does one of these
virtuous deeds hoping for Allah's reward with firm confidence that he will
get it, then Allah will make him enter Paradise because of Hassan (a subnarrator) said, "We tried to count those good deeds below the Maniha; we
mentioned replying to the sneezer, removing harmful things from the road,
etc., but we failed to count even fifteen."

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 801:
Narrated Jabir:
Some men had superfluous land and they said that they would give it to
others to cultivate on the condition that they would get one-third or one-
fourth or one half of its yield. The Prophet said, "Whoever has land should
cultivate it himself or give it to his brother or keep it uncultivated."
Narrated Abu Said: A bedouin came to the Prophet and asked him about
emigration. The Prophet said to him, "May Allah be merciful to you. The
matter of emigration is difficult. Have you got some camels?" He replied in
the affirmative. The Prophet asked him, "Do you pay their Zakat?" He replied
in the affirmative. He asked, "Do you lend them so that their milk may be
utilized by others?" The bedouin said, "Yes." The Prophet asked, "Do you
milk them on the day off watering them?" He replied, "Yes." The Prophet
said, "Do good deeds beyond the merchants (or the sea) and Allah will never
disregard any of your deeds." (See Hadith No. 260, Vol. 5)

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 802:
Narrated Tawus:
That he was told by the most learned one amongst them (i.e. Ibn Abbas)
that the Prophet went towards some land which was flourishing with
vegetation and asked to whom it belonged. He was told that such and such
a person took it on rent. The Prophet said, "It would have been better (for
the owner) if he had given it to him gratis rather than charging him a fixed
rent.

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 803:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The Prophet Abraham migrated with Sarah. The
people (of the town where they migrated) gave her Ajar (i.e. Hajar). Sarah
returned and said to Abraham, "Do you know that Allah has humiliated that
pagan and he has given a slave-girl for my service?"

Volume 3, Book 47, Number 804:
Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khatab:
Once I gave a horse (for riding) in Allah's Cause. Later I saw it being sold. I
asked Allah's Apostle (whether I could buy it). He said, "Don't buy it, for you
should not get back what you have given in charity."
BOOK 48. WITNESSES (805-854)
Volume 3, Book 48, Number 805:
Narrated Urwa bin Al-Musayyab, Alqama bin Waqqas and Ubaidullah bin
Abdullah:
About the story of 'Aisha and their narrations were similar attesting each
other, when the liars said what they invented about 'Aisha, and the Divine
Inspiration was delayed, Allah's Apostle sent for 'Ali and Usama to consult
them in divorcing his wife (i.e. 'Aisha). Usama said, "Keep your wife, as we
know nothing about her except good." Buraira said, "I cannot accuse her of
any defect except that she is still a young girl who sleeps, neglecting her
family's dough which the domestic goats come to eat (i.e. she was too
simpleminded to deceive her husband)." Allah's Apostle said, "Who can help
me to take revenge over the man who has harmed me by defaming the
reputation of my family? By Allah, I have not known about my familyanything except good, and they mentioned (i.e. accused) a man about
whom I did not know anything except good."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 806:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
Allah's Apostle and Ubai bin Kab Al-Ansari went to the garden where Ibn
Saiyad used to live. When Allah's Apostle entered (the garden), he (i.e.
Allah's Apostle ) started hiding himself behind the datepalms as he wanted
to hear secretly the talk of Ibn Saiyad before the latter saw him. Ibn Saiyad
wrapped with a soft decorated sheet was lying on his bed murmuring. Ibn
Saiyad's mother saw the Prophet hiding behind the stems of the date-palms.
She addressed Ibn Saiyad saying, "O Saf, this is Muhammad." Hearing that
Ibn Saiyad stopped murmuring (or got cautious), the Prophet said, "If she
had left him undisturbed, he would have revealed his reality." (See Hadith
No. 290, Vol 4 for details)
Volume 3, Book 48, Number 807:
Narrated Aisha:
The wife of Rifa'a Al-Qurazi came to the Prophet and said, "I was Rifa'a's
wife, but he divorced me and it was a final irrevocable divorce. Then I
married AbdurRahman bin Az-Zubair but he is impotent." The Prophet asked
her 'Do you want to remarry Rifa'a? You cannot unless you had a complete
sexual relation with your present husband." Abu Bakr was sitting with
Allah's Apostle and Khalid bin Said bin Al-'As was at the door waiting to be
admitted. He said, "O Abu Bakr! Do you hear what this (woman) is revealing
frankly before the Prophet ?"

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 808:
Narrated Abdullah bin Abu Mulaika from 'Uqba bin Al-Harith:
Uqba married the daughter of Abu Ihab bin Aziz, and then a woman came
and said, "I suckled 'Uqba and his wife." 'Uqba said to her, "I do not know
that you have suckled me, and you did not inform me." He then sent
someone to the house of Abu Ihab to enquire about that but they did not
know that she had suckled their daughter. Then 'Uqba went to the Prophet
in Medina and asked him about it. The Prophet said to him, "How (can you
keep your wife) after it has been said (that both of you were suckled by the
same woman)?" So, he divorced her and she was married to another
(husband).

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 809:
Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:
People were (sometimes) judged by the revealing of a Divine Inspiration
during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle but now there is no longer any more
(new revelation). Now we judge you by the deeds you practice publicly, so
we will trust and favor the one who does good deeds in front of us, and we
will not call him to account about what he is really doing in secret, for Allah
will judge him for that; but we will not trust or believe the one who presents
to us with an evil deed even if he claims that his intentions were good.

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 810:
Narrated Anas:
A funeral procession passed in front of the Prophet and the people praised
the deceased. The Prophet said, "It has been affirmed (Paradise)." Then
another funeral procession passed by and the people talked badly of the
deceased. The Prophet said, "It has been affirmed (Hell)." Allah's Apostle
was asked, "O Allah's Apostle! You said it has been affirmed for both?" The
Prophet said, "The testimony of the people (is accepted), (for) the believer
are Allah's witnesses on the earth."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 811:
Narrated Abu Al-Aswad:
Once I went to Medina where there was an outbreak of disease and the
people were dying rapidly. I was sitting with 'Umar and a funeral procession
passed by. The people praised the deceased. 'Umar said, "It has been
affirmed" (Paradise). Then another funeral procession passed by. The
people praised the deceased. 'Umar said, "It has been affirmed." (Paradise).
Then another funeral procession passed by. The people praised the
deceased. 'Umar said, "It has been affirmed (Paradise)." Then a third funeral
procession passed by and the people talked badly of the deceased. 'Umar
said, "It has been affirmed (Hell)." I asked Umar, "O chief of the believers!
What has been affirmed?" He said, "I have said what the Prophet said. He
said, 'Allah will admit into paradise any Muslim whose good character is
attested by four persons.' We asked the Prophet, 'If there were three
witnesses only?' He said, 'Even three.' We asked, 'If there were two only?'
He said, 'Even two.' But we did not ask him about one witness."
Volume 3, Book 48, Number 812:
Narrated Aisha:
Aflah asked the permission to visit me but I did not allow him. He said, "Do
you veil yourself before me although I am your uncle?" 'Aisha said, "How is
that?" Aflah replied, "You were suckled by my brother's wife with my
brother's milk." I asked Allah's Apostle about it, and he said, "Allah is right,
so permit him to visit you."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 813:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said about Hamza's daughter, "I am not legally permitted to
marry her, as foster relations are treated like blood relations (in marital
affairs). She is the daughter of my foster brother."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 814:
Narrated Amra bint 'Abdur-Rahman:
That 'Aisha the wife of the Prophet told her uncle that once, while the
Prophet was in her house, she heard a man asking Hafsa's permission to
enter her house. 'Aisha said, "I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! I think the man is
Hafsa's foster uncle.' " 'Aisha added, "O Allah's Apostle! There is a man
asking the permission to enter your house." Allah's Apostle replied, "I think
the man is Hafsa's foster uncle." 'Aisha said, "If so-and-so were living (i.e.
her foster uncle) would he be allowed to visit me?" Allah's Apostle said,
"Yes, he would, as the foster relations are treated like blood relations (in
marital affairs)."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 815:
Narrated Aisha:
Once the Prophet came to me while a man was in my house. He said, "O
'Aisha! Who is this (man)?" I replied, "My foster brothers" He said, "O 'Aisha!
Be sure about your foster brothers, as fostership is only valid if it takes place
in the suckling period (before two years of age)."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 816:
Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair:
A woman committed theft in the Ghazwa of the Conquest (of Mecca) and
she was taken to the Prophet who ordered her hand to be cut off. 'Aisha
said, "Her repentance was perfect and she was married (later) and used to
come to me (after that) and I would present her needs to Allah's Apostle."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 817:
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid:
Allah's Apostle ordered that an unmarried man who committed illegal
sexual intercourse be scourged one hundred lashes and sent into exile for
one year.

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 818:
Narrated An-Nu'man bin Bashir:
My mother asked my father to present me a gift from his property; and he
gave it to me after some hesitation. My mother said that she would not be
satisfied unless the Prophet was made a witness to it. I being a young boy,
my father held me by the hand and took me to the Prophet . He said to the
Prophet, "His mother, bint Rawaha, requested me to give this boy a gift."
The Prophet said, "Do you have other sons besides him?" He said, "Yes." The
Prophet said, "Do not make me a witness for injustice." Narrated Ash-Shabi
that the Prophet said, "I will not become a witness for injustice."
Volume 3, Book 48, Number 819:
Narrated Zahdam bin Mudrab:
I heard Imran bin Husain saying, "The Prophet said, 'The best people are
those living in my generation, then those coming after them, and then those
coming after (the second generation)." Imran said "I do not know whether
the Prophet mentioned two or three generations after your present
generation. The Prophet added, 'There will be some people after you, who
will be dishonest and will not be trustworthy and will give witness
(evidences) without being asked to give witness, and will vow but will not
fulfill their vows, and fatness will appear among them."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 820:
Narrated Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "The people of my generation are the best, then those
who follow them, and then whose who follow the latter. After that there
will come some people whose witness will go ahead of their oaths, and their
oaths will go ahead of their witness." Ibrahim (a sub-narrator) said, "We
used to be beaten for taking oaths by saying, 'I bear witness by the Name of
Allah or by the Covenant of Allah."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 821:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet was asked about the great sins He said, "They are:-(1 ) To join others in worship with Allah,
(2) To be undutiful to one's parents.
(3) To kill a person (which Allah has forbidden to kill) (i.e. to commit the
crime of murdering).
(4) And to give a false witness."
Volume 3, Book 48, Number 822:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
The Prophet said thrice, "Should I inform you out the greatest of the great
sins?" They said, "Yes, O Allah's Apostle!" He said, "To join others in worship
with Allah and to be undutiful to one's parents." The Prophet then sat up
after he had been reclining (on a pillow) and said, "And I warn you against
giving a false witness, and he kept on saying that warning till we thought he
would not stop. (See Hadith No. 7, Vol. 8)

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 823:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet heard a man (reciting Quran) in the Mosque, and he said, "May
Allah bestow His Mercy upon him. No doubt, he made me remember suchand such Verses of such-and-such Sura which I dropped (from my memory).
Narrated Aisha: The Prophet performed the Tahajjud prayer in my house,
and then he heard the voice of 'Abbas who was praying in the Mosque, and
said, "O 'Aisha! Is this 'Abbad's voice?" I said, "Yes." He said, "O Allah! Be
merciful to 'Abbas!"

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 824:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
The Prophet said, "Bilal pronounces the Adhan when it is still night (before
dawn), so eat and drink till the next Adhan is pronounced (or till you hear
Ibn Um Maktum's Adhan)." Ibn Um Maktum was a blind man who would not
pronounce the Adhan till he was told that it was dawn.

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 825:
Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:
Some outer garments were received the Prophet and my father (Makhrama)
said to me, "Let us go to the Prophet so that he may give us something from
the garments." So, my father stood at the door and spoke. The Prophet
recognized his voice and came out carrying a garment and telling Makhrama
the good qualities of that garment, adding, "I have kept this for you, I have
sent this for you."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 826:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said, "Isn't the witness of a woman equal to half of that of a
man?" The women said, "Yes." He said, "This is because of the deficiency of
a woman's mind."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 827:
Narrated Uqba bin Al-Harith:
That he had married Um Yahya bint Abu Ihab. He said. "A black slave-lady
came and said, 'I suckled you both.' I then mentioned that to the Prophet
who turned his face aside." Uqba further said, "I went to the other side and
told the Prophet about it. He said, 'How can you (keep her as your wife)
when the lady has said that she suckled both of you (i.e. you and your
wife?)" So, the Prophet ordered him to divorce her.

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 828:
Narrated 'Uqba bin Al-Harith:
I married a woman and later on a woman came and said, "I suckled you
both." So, I went to the Prophet (to ask him about it). He said, "How can you
(keep her as a wife) when it has been said (that you were foster brother and
sister)? Leave (divorce) her.
Volume 3, Book 48, Number 829:
Narrated Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) "Whenever Allah's Apostle intended to go on a
journey, he would draw lots amongst his wives and would take with him the
one upon whom the lot fell. During a Ghazwa of his, he drew lots amongst
us and the lot fell upon me, and I proceeded with him after Allah had
decreed the use of the veil by women. I was carried in a Howdah (on the
camel) and dismounted while still in it. When Allah's Apostle was through
with his Ghazwa and returned home, and we approached the city of Medina,
Allah's Apostle ordered us to proceed at night. When the order of setting off
was given, I walked till I was past the army to answer the call of nature.
After finishing I returned (to the camp) to depart (with the others) and
suddenly realized that my necklace over my chest was missing. So, I
returned to look for it and was delayed because of that. The people who
used to carry me on the camel, came to my Howdah and put it on the back
of the camel, thinking that I was in it, as, at that time, women were light in
weight, and thin and lean, and did not use to eat much. So, those people did
not feel the difference in the heaviness of the Howdah while lifting it, and
they put it over the camel. At that time I was a young lady. They set the
camel moving and proceeded on. I found my necklace after the army had
gone, and came to their camp to find nobody. So, I went to the place where
I used to stay, thinking that they would discover my absence and come back
in my search. While in that state, I felt sleepy and slept.
Safwan bin Mu'attal As-Sulami Adh-Dhakwani was behind the army and
reached my abode in the morning. When he saw a sleeping person, he came
to me, and he used to see me before veiling. So, I got up when I heard him
saying, "Inna lil-lah-wa inn a ilaihi rajiun (We are for Allah, and we will return
to Him)." He made his camel knell down. He got down from his camel, and
put his leg on the front legs of the camel and then I rode and sat over it.
Safwan set out walking, leading the camel by the rope till we reached the
army who had halted to take rest at midday. Then whoever was meant for
destruction, fell into destruction, (some people accused me falsely) and the
leader of the false accusers was 'Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul. After that we
returned to Medina, and I became ill for one month while the people were
spreading the forged statements of the false accusers. I was feeling during
my ailment as if I were not receiving the usual kindness from the Prophet
which I used to receive from him when I got sick. But he would come, greet
and say, 'How is that (girl)?' I did not know anything of what was going on
till I recovered from my ailment and went out with Um Mistah to the Manasi
where we used to answer the call of nature, and we used not to go to
answer the call of nature except from night to night and that was before we
had lavatories near to our houses. And this habit of ours was similar to the
habit of the old 'Arabs in the open country (or away from houses). So. I and
Um Mistah bint Ruhm went out walking. Um Mistah stumbled because of
her long dress and on that she said, 'Let Mistah be ruined.' I said, 'You are
saying a bad word. Why are you abusing a man who took part in (the battle
of) Badr?' She said, 'O Hanata (you there) didn't you hear what they said?'
Then she told me the rumors of the false accusers.
My sickness was aggravated, and when I returned home, Allah's Apostle
came to me, and after greeting he said, 'How is that (girl)?' I requested him
to allow me to go to my parents. I wanted then to be sure of the news
through them I Allah's Apostle allowed me, and I went to my parents and
asked my mother, 'What are the people talking about?' She said, 'O my
daughter! Don't worry much about this matter. By Allah, never is there a
charming woman loved by her husband who has other wives, but the
women would forge false news about her.' I said, 'Glorified be Allah! Are the
people really taking of this matter?' That night I kept on weeping and could
not sleep till morning. In the morning Allah's Apostle called Ali bin Abu Talib
and Usama bin Zaid when he saw the Divine Inspiration delayed, to consul
them about divorcing his wife (i.e. 'Aisha). Usama bin Zaid said what he
knew of the good reputation of his wives and added, 'O Allah's Apostle!
Keep you wife, for, by Allah, we know nothing about her but good.' 'Ali bin
Abu Talib said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Allah has no imposed restrictions on you,
and there are many women other than she, yet you may ask the womanservant who will tell you the truth.' On that Allah's Apostle called Buraira
and said, 'O Burair. Did you ever see anything which roused your suspicions
about her?' Buraira said, 'No, by Allah Who has sent you with the Truth, I
have never seen in her anything faulty except that she is a girl of immature
age, who sometimes sleeps and leaves the dough for the goats to eat.' On
that day Allah's Apostle ascended the pulpit and requested that somebody
support him in punishing 'Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul. Allah's Apostle said,
'Who will support me to punish that person ('Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul)
who has hurt me by slandering the reputation of my family? By Allah, I know
nothing about my family but good, and they have accused a person about
whom I know nothing except good, and he never entered my house except
in my company.'
Sad bin Mu'adh got up and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! by Allah, I will relieve you
from him. If that man is from the tribe of the Aus, then we will chop his head
off, and if he is from our brothers, the Khazraj, then order us, and we will
fulfill your order.' On that Sad bin 'Ubada, the chief of the Khazraj and
before this incident, he had been a pious man, got up, motivated by his zeal
for his tribe and said, 'By Allah, you have told a lie; you cannot kill him, and
you will never be able to kill him.' On that Usaid bin Al-Hadir got up and said
(to Sad bin 'Ubada), 'By Allah! you are a liar. By Allah, we will kill him; and
you are a hypocrite, defending the hypocrites.' On this the two tribes of Aus
and Khazraj got excited and were about to fight each other, while Allah's
Apostle was standing on the pulpit. He got down and quietened them till
they became silent and he kept quiet. On that day I kept on weeping so
much so that neither did my tears stop, nor could I sleep.
In the morning my parents were with me and I had wept for two nights and
a day, till I thought my liver would burst from weeping. While they were
sitting with me and I was weeping, an Ansari woman asked my permission
to enter, and I allowed her to come in. She sat down and started weeping
with me. While we were in this state, Allah's Apostle came and sat down and
he had never sat with me since the day they forged the accusation. No
revelation regarding my case came to him for a month. He recited Tashahhud (i.e. None has the right to be worshipped but Allah and Muhammad is
His Apostle) and then said, 'O 'Aisha! I have been informed such-and-such
about you; if you are innocent, then Allah will soon reveal your innocence,
and if you have committed a sin, then repent to Allah and ask Him to forgive
you, for when a person confesses his sin and asks Allah for forgiveness, Allah
accepts his repentance.' When Allah's Apostle finished his speech my tears
ceased completely and there remained not even a single drop of it. I
requested my father to reply to Allah's Apostle on my behalf. My father said,
By Allah, I do not know what to say to Allah's Apostle.' I said to my mother,
'Talk to Allah's Apostle on my behalf.' She said, 'By Allah, I do not know
what to say to Allah's Apostle.
I was a young girl and did not have much knowledge of the Quran. I said. 'I
know, by Allah, that you have listened to what people are saying and that
has been planted in your minds and you have taken it as a truth. Now, if I
told you that I am innocent and Allah knows that I am innocent, you would
not believe me and if I confessed to you falsely that I am guilty, and Allah
knows that I am innocent you would believe me. By Allah, I don't compare
my situation with you except to the situation of Joseph's father (i.e. Jacob)
who said, 'So (for me) patience is most fitting against that which you assert
and it is Allah (Alone) whose help can be sought.' Then I turned to the other
side of my bed hoping that Allah would prove my innocence. By Allah I never
thought that Allah would reveal Divine Inspiration in my case, as I
considered myself too inferior to be talked of in the Holy Qur'an. I had
hoped that Allah's Apostle might have a dream in which Allah would prove
my innocence. By Allah, Allah's Apostle had not got up and nobody had left
the house before the Divine Inspiration came to Allah's Apostle. So, there
overtook him the same state which used to overtake him, (when he used to
have, on being inspired divinely). He was sweating so much so that the
drops of the sweat were dropping like pearls though it was a (cold) wintry
day. When that state of Allah's Apostle was over, he was smiling and the
first word he said, 'Aisha! Thank Allah, for Allah has declared your
innocence.' My mother told me to go to Allah's Apostle . I replied, 'By Allah I
will not go to him and will not thank but Allah.' So Allah revealed: "Verily!
They who spread the slander are a gang among you . . ." (24.11)
When Allah gave the declaration of my Innocence, Abu Bakr, who used to
provide for Mistah bin Uthatha for he was his relative, said, 'By Allah, I will
never provide Mistah with anything because of what he said about Aisha.'
But Allah later revealed: --
"And let not those who are good and wealthy among you swear not to help
their kinsmen, those in need and those who left their homes in Allah's
Cause. Let them forgive and overlook. Do you not wish that Allah should
forgive you? Verily! Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful." (24.22) After that
Abu Bakr said, 'Yes ! By Allah! I like that Allah should forgive me,' and
resumed helping Mistah whom he used to help before.
Allah's Apostle also asked Zainab bint Jahsh (i.e. the Prophet's wife about
me saying, 'What do you know and what did you see?' She replied, 'O Allah's
Apostle! I refrain to claim hearing or seeing what I have not heard or seen.
By Allah, I know nothing except goodness about Aisha." Aisha further added
"Zainab was competing with me (in her beauty and the Prophet's love), yet
Allah protected her (from being malicious), for she had piety."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 830:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
A man praised another man in front of the Prophet . The Prophet said to
him, "Woe to you, you have cut off your companion's neck, you have cut off
your companion's neck," repeating it several times and then added,
"Whoever amongst you has to praise his brother should say, 'I think that he
is so and so, and Allah knows exactly the truth, and I do not confirm
anybody's good conduct before Allah, but I think him so and so,' if he really
knows what he says about him."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 831:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari:
The Prophet heard someone praising another and exaggerating in his praise.
The Prophet said, "You have ruined or cut the man's back (by praising him
so much).

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 832:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle called me to present myself in front of him or the eve of the
battle of Uhud, while I was fourteen years of age at that time, and he did not
allow me to take part in that battle, but he called me in front of him on the
eve of the battle of the Trench when I was fifteen years old, and he allowed
me (to join the battle)." Nafi' said, "I went to 'Umar bin 'Abdul Aziz who was
Caliph at that time and related the above narration to him, He said, "This age
(fifteen) is the limit between childhood and manhood," and wrote to his
governors to give salaries to those who reached the age of fifteen.

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 833:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said, "Bath on Friday is compulsory for those who have
attained the age of puberty."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 834:
Narrated Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "If somebody takes a false oath in order to get the
property of a Muslim (unjustly) by that oath, then Allah will be angry with
him when he will meet Him." Al-Ash'ath informed me, "By Allah! This was
said regarding me. There was a dispute about a piece of land between me
and a man from the Jews who denied my right. I took him to the Prophet.
Allah's Apostle asked me, 'Do you have an evidence?' I replied in the
negative. He said to the Jew, 'Take an oath.' I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! He will
surely take an oath and take my property unjustly." So, Allah revealed:
"Verily! Those who purchase a little gain at the cost of Allah's covenant and
their oaths . . . " (3.77)

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 835:
Narrated Ibn Abu Mulaika:
Ibn 'Abbas wrote that the Prophet gave his verdict on the basis of the
defendant's oath.

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 836:
Narrated Abu Wail:
Abdullah (bin Mas'ud) said, "Whoever takes a (false) oath in order to grab
some property (unjustly), Allah will be angry with him when he will meet
Him. Allah confirmed that through His Divine Revelation: "Verily! Those who
purchase a little gain at the cost of Allah's covenant and their oaths . . . they
will have a painful punishment." (3.77)
Al-Ash'ath bin Qais came to us and asked, 'What is Abu Abdur-Rahman (i.e.
'Abdullah) telling you? 'We told him what he was narrating to us. He said,
'He was telling the truth; this Divine Verse was revealed in connection with
me. There was a dispute between me and another man about something
and the case was filed before Allah's Apostle who said, 'Produce your two
witnesses or else the defendant is to take an oath.' I said, The defendant will
surely take a (false) oath caring for nothing.' The Prophet said, 'Whoever
takes a false oath in order to grab (other's) property, then Allah will be
angry with him when he will meet Him.' Then Allah revealed its
confirmation. Al-Ashath then recited the above Divine Verse." (3.77)

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 837:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Hilal bin Umaiya accused his wife before the Prophet of committing illegal
sexual intercourse with Sharik bin Sahma.' The Prophet said, "Produce a
proof, or else you would get the legal punishment (by being lashed) on your
back." Hilal said, "O Allah's Apostle! If anyone of us saw another man over
his wife, would he go to search for a proof." The Prophet went on saying,
"Produce a proof or else you would get the legal punishment (by being
lashed) on your back." The Prophet then mentioned the narration of Lian (as
in the Holy Book). (Surat-al-Nur: 24)

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 838:
Narrated Abu Huraira: Allah's Apostle said, "There are three persons whom
Allah will neither talk to nor look at, nor purify from (the sins), and they will
have a painful punishment. (They are):
(1) A man possessed superfluous water on a way and he withheld it from the
travelers.
(2) a man who gives a pledge of allegiance to a Muslim ruler and gives it only
for worldly gains. If the ruler gives him what he wants, he remains obedient
to It, otherwise he does not abide by it, and
(3) a man bargains with another man after the Asr prayer and the latter
takes a false oath in the Name of Allah) claiming that he has been offered so
much for the thing and the former (believes him and) buys it."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 839:
Narrated Ibn Mas'ud:
The Prophet said, "Whoever takes a (false) oath in order to grab (others)
property, then Allah will be angry with him when he will meet Him."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 840:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet asked some people to take an oath, and they hurried for it. The
Prophet ordered that lots should be drawn amongst them as to who would
take an oath first.
Volume 3, Book 48, Number 841:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Aufa:
A man displayed some goods in the market and took a false oath that he had
been offered so much for them though he was not offered that amount
Then the following Divine Verse was revealed:-- "Verily! Those who purchase
a little gain at the cost of Allah's covenant and their oaths . . . Will get painful
punishment." (3.77) Ibn Abu Aufa added, "Such person as described above is
a treacherous Riba-eater (i.e. eater of usury).

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 842:
Narrated Abu Wail from Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "Whoever takes a false oath in order to grab another
man's (or his brother's) property, then Allah will be angry with him when he
will meet him." Then Allah confirmed this by revealing the Divine Verse:
"Verily! Those who purchase a little gain at the cost of Allah's Covenant and
their oaths . . . Will get painful punishment." (3.77) Al-Ash'ath met me and
asked, "What did 'Abdullah tell you today?" I said, "So and so." He said, "The
Verse was revealed regarding my case."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 843:
Narrated Talha bin 'Ubaidullah:
A man came to Allah's Apostle asking him about Islam, Allah's Apostle said,
"You have to offer five compulsory prayers in a day and a night (24 hours)."
The man asked, "Is there any more compulsory prayers for me?" Allah's
Apostle said, "No, unless you like to offer Nawafil (i.e. optional prayers)."
Allah's Apostle then added, "You have to observe fasts during the month of
Ramadan." The man said, "Am I to fast any other days?' Allah's Apostle said,
"No, unless you wish to observe the optional fast voluntarily." Then Allah's
Apostle told him about the compulsory Zakat. The man asked, "Do I have to
give anything besides?" Allah's Apostle said, "No, unless you wish to give in
charity voluntarily." So, the man departed saying, "By Allah I will neither do
more nor less than that." Allah's Apostle said, "If he has said the truth he will
be successful."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 844:
Narrated Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "Whoever has to take an oath should swear by Allah or
remain silent." (i.e. He should not swear by other than Allah.)

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 845:
Narrated Um Salama:
Once Allah's Apostle said, "You people present your cases to me and some
of you may be more eloquent and persuasive in presenting their argument.
So, if I give some one's right to another (wrongly) because of the latter's
(tricky) presentation of the case, I am really giving him a piece of fire; so he
should not take it."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 846:
Narrated Abdullah bin Abbas:
Abu Sufyan told me that Heraclius said to him, "When I enquired you what
he (i.e. Muhammad) ordered you, you replied that he ordered you to
establish the prayer, to speak the truth, to be chaste, to keep promises and
to pay back trusts." Then Heraclius added, "These are really the qualities of a
prophet."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 847:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The signs of a hypocrite are three:
(1) whenever he speaks, he tells a lie,
(2) whenever he is entrusted, he proves to be dishonest,
(3) whenever he promises, he breaks his promise.

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 848:
Narrated Muhammad bin Ali:
Jabir bin Abdullah said, "When the Prophet died, Abu Bakr received some
property from Al-Ala bin Al-Hadrami. Abu Bakr said to the people, "Whoever
has a money claim on the Prophet, or was promised something by him,
should come to us (so that we may pay him his right)." Jabir added, "I said
(to Abu Bakr), Allah's Apostle promised me that he would give me this
much, and this much, and this much (spreading his hands three times)."
Jabir added, "Abu Bakr counted for me and handed me five-hundred (gold
pieces), and then five-hundred, and then five-hundred."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 849:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
A Jew from Hira asked me which one of the two periods Musa (i.e. Prophet
Moses) completed. I said, "I don't know, (but wait) till I see the most
learned 'Arab and enquire him about it." So, I went to Ibn 'Abbas and asked
him. He replied, "Moses completed the longer and better period." Ibn
'Abbas added, "No doubt, an apostle of Allah always does what he says."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 850:
Narrated Ubaidullah bin Abdullah bin Utba:
Ibn Abbas said, "O Muslims? How do you ask the people of the Scriptures,
though your Book (i.e. the Quran) which was revealed to His Prophet is th
most recent information from Allah and you recite it, the Book that has not
been distorted? Allah has revealed to you that the people of the scriptures
have changed with their own hands what was revealed to them and they
have said (as regards their changed Scriptures): This is from Allah, in order
to get some worldly benefit thereby." Ibn Abbas added: "Isn't the
knowledge revealed to you sufficient to prevent you from asking them? By
Allah I have never seen any one of them asking (Muslims) about what has
been revealed to you."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 851:
Narrated An-Nu'man bin Bashir:
The Prophet said, "The example of the person abiding by Allah's orders and
limits (or the one who abides by the limits and regulations prescribed by
Allah) in comparison to the one who do wrong and violate Allah's limits and
orders is like the example of people drawing lots for seats in a boat. Some of
them got seats in the upper part while the others in the lower part ; those in
the, lower part have to pass by those in the upper one to get water, and
that troubled the latter. One of them (i.e. the people in the lower part) took
an axe and started making a hole in the bottom of the boat. The people of
the upper part came and asked him, (saying), 'What is wrong with you?' He
replied, "You have been troubled much by my (coming up to you), and I
have to get water.' Now if they prevent him from doing that they will save
him and themselves, but if they leave him (to do what he wants), they will
destroy him and themselves."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 852:
Narrated Um Al-Ala:
That when the Ansar drew lots as to which of the emigrants should dwell
with which of the Ansar, the name of Uthman bin Mazun came out (to be in
their lot). Um Al-Ala further said, "Uthman stayed with us, and we nursed
him when he got sick, but he died. We shrouded him in his clothes, and
Allah's Apostle came to our house and I said, (addressing the dead
'Uthman), 'O Abu As-Sa'ib! May Allah be merciful to you. I testify that Allah
has blessed you.' The Prophet said to me, "How do you know that Allah has
blessed him?" I replied, 'I do not know O Allah's Apostle! May my parents be
sacrificed for you.' Allah's Apostle said, 'As regards Uthman, by Allah he has
died and I really wish him every good, yet, by Allah, although I am Allah's
Apostle, I do not know what will be done to him.' Um Al-Ala added, 'By Allah
I shall never attest the piety of anybody after him. And what Allah's Apostles
said made me sad." Um Al-Ala further said, "Once I slept and saw in a dream,
a flowing stream for Uthman. So I went to Allah's Apostle and told him
about it, he said, 'That is (the symbol of) his deeds."

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 853:
Narrated Aisha:
Whenever Allah's Apostle intended to go on a journey, he used to draw lots
among his wives and would take with him the one on whom the lot fell. He
also used to fix for everyone of his wives a day and a night, but Sauda bint
Zam'a gave her day and night to 'Aisha, the wife of the Prophet intending
thereby to please Allah's Apostle.

Volume 3, Book 48, Number 854:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If the people knew what is the reward of making the
call (for the prayer) and (of being in) the first row (in the prayer), and if they
found no other way to get this privilege except by casting lots, they would
certainly cast lots for it. If they knew the reward of the noon prayer, they
would race for it, and if they knew the reward of the morning (i.e. Fajr) and
Isha prayers, they would present themselves for the prayer even if they had
to crawl to reach there.


BOOK 49. PEACEMAKING (855-873)
Volume 3, Book 49, Number 855:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
There was a dispute amongst the people of the tribe of Bani 'Amr bin 'Auf.
The Prophet went to them along with some of his companions in order to
make peace between them. The time for the prayer became due but the
Prophet did not turn up; Bilal pronounced the Adhan (i.e. call) for the prayer
but the Prophet did not turn up, so Bilal went to Abu Bakr and said, "The
time for the prayer is due and the Prophet i detained, would you lead the
people in the prayer?" Abu Bakr replied, "Yes, you wish." So, Bilal
pronounced the Iqama of the prayer and Abu Bakr went ahead (to lead the
prayer), but the Prophet came walking among the rows till he joined the
first row. The people started clapping and they clapped too much, and Abu
Bakr used not to look hither and thither in the prayer, but he turned round
and saw the Prophet standing behind him. The Prophet beckoned him with
his hand to keep on praying where he was. Abu Bakr raised his hand and
praised Allah and then retreated till he came in the (first) row, and the
Prophet went ahead and lead the people in the prayer. When the Prophet
finished the prayer, he turned towards the people and said, "O people!
When something happens to you during the prayer, you start clapping.
Really clapping is (permissible) for women only. If something happens to
one of you in his prayer, he should say: 'Subhan Allah', (Glorified be Allah),
for whoever hears him (saying so) will direct his attention towards him. O
Abu Bakr! What prevented you from leading the people in the prayer when I
beckoned to you (to continue)?" Abu Bakr replied, "It did not befit the son
of Abu Quhafa to lead the prayer in front of the Prophet.

Volume 3, Book 49, Number 856:
Narrated Anas:
It was said to the Prophet "Would that you see Abdullah bin Ubai." So, the
Prophet went to him, riding a donkey, and the Muslims accompanied him,
walking on salty barren land. When the Prophet reached 'Abdullah bin Ubai,
the latter said, "Keep away from me! By Allah, the bad smell of your donkey
has harmed me." On that an Ansari man said (to 'Abdullah), "By Allah! The
smell of the donkey of Allah's Apostle is better than your smell." On that a
man from 'Abdullah's tribe got angry for 'Abdullah's sake, and the two men
abused each other which caused the friends of the two men to get angry,
and the two groups started fighting with sticks, shoes and hands. We were
informed that the following Divine Verse was revealed (in this concern):-"And if two groups of Believers fall to fighting then, make peace between
them." (49.9)

Volume 3, Book 49, Number 857:
Narrated Um Kulthum bint Uqba:
That she heard Allah's Apostle saying, "He who makes peace between the
people by inventing good information or saying good things, is not a liar."

Volume 3, Book 49, Number 858:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
Once the people of Quba fought with each other till they threw stones on
each other. When Allah's Apostle was informed about it, he said, "Let us go
to bring about a reconciliation between them."

Volume 3, Book 49, Number 859:
Narrated Aisha:
The following Verse: If a woman fears cruelty or desertion on her husband's
part (i.e. the husband notices something unpleasant about his wife, such as
old age or the like, and wants to divorce her, but she asks him to keep her
and provide for her as he wishes). (4.128) "There is no blame on them if they
reconcile on such basis."

Volume 3, Book 49, Number 860:
Narrated Abu Huraira and Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani:
A bedouin came and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Judge between us according
to Allah's Laws." His opponent got up and said, "He is right. Judge between
us according to Allah's Laws." The bedouin said, "My son was a laborer
working for this man, and he committed illegal sexual intercourse with his
wife. The people told me that my son should be stoned to death; so, in lieu
of that, I paid a ransom of one hundred sheep and a slave girl to save my
son. Then I asked the learned scholars who said, "Your son has to be lashed
one-hundred lashes and has to be exiled for one year." The Prophet said,
"No doubt I will judge between you according to Allah's Laws. The slave-girl
and the sheep are to go back to you, and your son will get a hundred lashes
and one year exile." He then addressed somebody, "O Unais! go to the wife
of this (man) and stone her to death" So, Unais went and stoned her to
death.

Volume 3, Book 49, Number 861:
Narrated Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said, "If somebody innovates something which is not in
harmony with the principles of our religion, that thing is rejected."

Volume 3, Book 49, Number 862:
Narrated Al-Bara bin 'Azib:
When Allah's Apostle concluded a peace treaty with the people of
Hudaibiya, Ali bin Abu Talib wrote the document and he mentioned in it,
"Muhammad, Allah's Apostle ." The pagans said, "Don't write: 'Muhammad,
Allah's Apostle', for if you were an apostle we would not fight with you."
Allah's Apostle asked Ali to rub it out, but Ali said, "I will not be the person
to rub it out." Allah's Apostle rubbed it out and made peace with them on
the condition that the Prophet and his companions would enter Mecca and
stay there for three days, and that they would enter with their weapons in
cases.

Volume 3, Book 49, Number 863:
Narrated Al-Bara:
When the Prophet intended to perform 'Umra in the month of Dhul-Qada,
the people of Mecca did not let him enter Mecca till he settled the matter
with them by promising to stay in it for three days only. When the document
of treaty was written, the following was mentioned: 'These are the terms on
which Muhammad, Allah's Apostle agreed (to make peace).' They said, "We
will not agree to this, for if we believed that you are Allah's Apostle we
would not prevent you, but you are Muhammad bin 'Abdullah." The Prophet
said, "I am Allah's Apostle and also Muhammad bin 'Abdullah." Then he said
to 'Ali, "Rub off (the words) 'Allah's Apostle' ", but 'Ali said, "No, by Allah, I
will never rub off your name." So, Allah's Apostle took the document and
wrote, 'This is what Muhammad bin 'Abdullah has agreed upon: No arms will
be brought into Mecca except in their cases, and nobody from the people of
Mecca will be allowed to go with him (i.e. the Prophet ) even if he wished to
follow him and he (the Prophet ) will not prevent any of his companions
from staying in Mecca if the latter wants to stay.' When the Prophet entered
Mecca and the time limit passed, the Meccans went to 'Ali and said, "Tell
your Friend (i.e. the Prophet ) to go out, as the period (agreed to) has
passed." So, the Prophet went out of Mecca. The daughter of Hamza ran
after them (i.e. the Prophet and his companions), calling, "O Uncle! O
Uncle!" 'Ali received her and led her by the hand and said to Fatima, "Take
your uncle's daughter." Zaid and Ja'far quarrel ed about her. 'Ali said, "I have
more right to her as she is my uncle's daughter." Ja'far said, "She is my
uncle's daughter, and her aunt is my wife." Zaid said, "She is my brother's
daughter." The Prophet judged that she should be given to her aunt, and
said that the aunt was like the mother. He then said to 'All, "You are from
me and I am from you", and said to Ja'far, "You resemble me both in
character and appearance", and said to Zaid, "You are our brother (in faith)
and our freed slave."

Volume 3, Book 49, Number 864:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle set out for the 'Umra but the pagans of Quraish prevented
him from reaching the Ka'ba. So, he slaughtered his sacrifice and got his
head shaved at Al-Hudaibiya, and agreed with them that he would perform
'Umra the following year and would not carry weapons except swords and
would not stay in Mecca except for the period they al lowed. So, the
Prophet performed the 'Umra in the following year and entered Mecca
according to the treaty, and when he stayed for three days, the pagans
ordered him to depart, and he departed.

Volume 3, Book 49, Number 865:
Narrated Sahl bin Abu Hathma:
Abdullah bin Sahl and Muhaiyisa bin Mas'ud bin Zaid went to Khaibar when
it had a peace treaty (with the Muslims).

Volume 3, Book 49, Number 866:
Narrated Anas:
Ar-Rabi, the daughter of An-Nadr broke the tooth of a girl, and the relatives
of Ar-Rabi' requested the girl's relatives to accept the Irsh (compensation
for wounds etc.) and forgive (the offender), but they refused. So, they went
to the Prophet who ordered them to bring about retaliation. Anas bin AnNadr asked, "O Allah"; Apostle! Will the tooth of Ar-Rabi' be broken? No, by
Him Who has sent you with the Truth, her tooth will not be broken." The
Prophet said, "O Anas! Allah"; law ordains retaliation." Later the relatives of
the girl agreed and forgave her. The Prophet said, "There are some of Allah's
slaves who, if they take an oath by Allah, are responded to by Allah i.e. their
oath is fulfilled). Anas added, "The people agreed and accepted the Irsh."

Volume 3, Book 49, Number 867:
Narrated Al-Hasan Al-Basri:
By Allah, Al-Hasan bin Ali led large battalions like mountains against
Muawiya. Amr bin Al-As said (to Muawiya), "I surely see battalions which will
not turn back before killing their opponents." Muawiya who was really the
best of the two men said to him, "O 'Amr! If these killed those and those
killed these, who would be left with me for the jobs of the public, who
would be left with me for their women, who would be left with me for their
children?" Then Muawiya sent two Quraishi men from the tribe of 'Abd-iShams called 'Abdur Rahman bin Sumura and Abdullah bin 'Amir bin Kuraiz
to Al-Hasan saying to them, "Go to this man (i.e. Al-Hasan) and negotiate
peace with him and talk and appeal to him." So, they went to Al-Hasan and
talked and appealed to him to accept peace. Al-Hasan said, "We, the
offspring of 'Abdul Muttalib, have got wealth and people have indulged in
killing and corruption (and money only will appease them)." They said to AlHasan, "Muawiya offers you so and so, and appeals to you and entreats you
to accept peace." Al-Hasan said to them, "But who will be responsible for
what you have said?" They said, "We will be responsible for it." So, whatever Al-Hasan asked they said, "We will be responsible for it for you." So, AlHasan concluded a peace treaty with Muawiya. Al-Hasan (Al-Basri) said: I
heard Abu Bakr saying, "I saw Allah's Apostle on the pulpit and Al-Hasan bin
'Ali was by his side. The Prophet was looking once at the people and once at
Al-Hasan bin 'Ali saying, 'This son of mine is a Saiyid (i.e. a noble) and may
Allah make peace between two big groups of Muslims through him."

Volume 3, Book 49, Number 868:
Narrated Aisha:
Once Allah's Apostle heard the loud voices of some opponents quarreling at
the door. One of them was appealing to the other to deduct his debt and
asking him to be lenient but the other was saying, "By Allah I will not do so."
Allah's Apostle went out to them and said, "Who is the one who was
swearing by Allah that he would not do a favor?" That man said, "I am that
person, O Allah's Apostle! I will give my opponent whatever he wishes."

Volume 3, Book 49, Number 869:
Narrated Abdullah bin Kab bin Malik from Kab bin Malik:
Abdullah bin Abu Hadrad Al-Aslami owed Kab bin Malik some money. One
day the latter met the former and demanded his right, and their voices grew
very loud. The Prophet passed by them and said, "O Ka'b," beckoning with
his hand as if intending to say, "Deduct half the debts." So, Kab took half
what the other owed him and remitted the other half.

Volume 3, Book 49, Number 870:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "There is a Sadaqa to be given for every joint of the
human body; and for every day on which the sun rises there is a reward of a
Sadaqa (i.e. charitable gift) for the one who establishes justice among
people."

Volume 3, Book 49, Number 871:
Narrated Urwa bin Az-Zubair:
Az-Zubair told me that he quarrelled with an Ansari man who had
participated in (the battle of) Badr in front of Allah's Apostle about a water
stream which both of them used for irrigation. Allah's Apostle said to AzZubair, "O Zubair! Irrigate (your garden) first, and then let the water flow to
your neighbor." The Ansari became angry and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Is it
because he is your cousin?" On that the complexion of Allah's Apostle
changed (because of anger) and said (to Az-Zubair), "I irrigate (your garden)
and then with-hold the water till it reaches the walls (surrounding the
palms)." So, Allah's Apostle gave Az-Zubair his full right. Before that Allah's
Apostle had given a generous judgment beneficial for Az-Zubair and the
Ansari, but when the Ansan irritated Allah's Apostle he gave Az-Zubair his
full right according to the evident law. Az-Zubair said, "By Allah ! I think the
following Verse was revealed concerning that case: "But no by your Lord
They can have No faith Until they make you judge In all disputes between
them." (4.65)

Volume 3, Book 49, Number 872:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
My father died and was in debt. I suggested that his creditors take the fruits
(i.e. dates) of my garden in lieu of the debt of my father, but they refused
the offer, as they thought that it would not cover the full debt. So, I went to
the Prophet and told him about it. He said (to me), "When you pluck the
dates and collect them in the Mirbad (i.e. a place where dates are dried), call
me (Allah's Apostle)." Finally he came accompanied by Abu Bakr and 'Umar
and sat on the dates and invoked Allah to bless them. Then he said, "Call
your creditors and give them their full rights." So, I paid all my father's
creditors in full and yet thirteen extra Wasqs of dates remained, seven of
which were 'Ajwa and six were Laun or six of which were Ajwa and seven
were Laun. I met Allah's Apostle at sunset and informed him about it. On
that he smiled and said, "Go to Abu Bakr and 'Umar and tell them about it."
They said, "We perceived that was going to happen, as Allah's Apostle did
what he did."

Volume 3, Book 49, Number 873:
Narrated Abdullah bin Kab:
That Ka'b bin Malik told him that in the lifetime of Allah's Apostle he
demanded his debt from Ibn Abu Hadrad in the Mosque. Their voices grew
louder till Allah's Apostle heard them while he was in his house. So he lifted
the curtain of his room and called Ka'b bin Malik saying, "O Ka'b!" He
replied, "Labbaik! O Allah's Apostle!" He beckoned to him with his hand
suggesting that he deduct half the debt. Ka'b said, "I agree, O Allah's
Apostle!" Allah's Apostle then said (to Ibn Abu Hadrad), "Get up and pay him
the rest."
BOOK 50. CONDITIONS (874-895)
Volume 3, Book 50, Number 874:
Narrated Marwan and al-Miswar bin Makhrama:
(from the companions of Allah's Apostle) When Suhail bin Amr agreed to
the Treaty (of Hudaibiya), one of the things he stipulated then, was that the
Prophet should return to them (i.e. the pagans) anyone coming to him from
their side, even if he was a Muslim; and would not interfere between them
and that person. The Muslims did not like this condition and got disgusted
with it. Suhail did not agree except with that condition. So, the Prophet
agreed to that condition and returned Abu Jandal to his father Suhail bin
'Amr. Thenceforward the Prophet returned everyone in that period (of
truce) even if he was a Muslim. During that period some believing women
emigrants including Um Kalthum bint Uqba bin Abu Muait who came to
Allah's Apostle and she was a young lady then. Her relative came to the
Prophet and asked him to return her, but the Prophet did not return her to
them for Allah had revealed the following Verse regarding women:
"O you who believe! When the believing women come to you as emigrants.
Examine them, Allah knows best as to their belief, then if you know them for
true believers, Send them not back to the unbelievers, (for) they are not
lawful (wives) for the disbelievers, Nor are the unbelievers lawful
(husbands) for them (60.10)
Narrated 'Urwa: Aisha told me, "Allah's Apostle used to examine them
according to this Verse: "O you who believe! When the believing women
come to you, as emigrants test them . . . for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful." (60.10-12) Aisha said, "When any of them agreed to that condition
Allah's Apostle would say to her, 'I have accepted your pledge of allegiance.'
He would only say that, but, by Allah he never touched the hand of any
women (i.e. never shook hands with them) while taking the pledge of
allegiance and he never took their pledge of allegiance except by his words
(only)."
Volume 3, Book 50, Number 875:
Narrated Jarir:
When I gave the pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle and he stipulated
that I should give good advice to every Muslim.

Volume 3, Book 50, Number 876:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
I gave the pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle for offering the prayers
perfectly paying the Zakat and giving good advice to every Muslim.

Volume 3, Book 50, Number 877:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "If someone sells pollinated date-palms, their fruits will
be for the seller, unless the buyer stipulates the contrary."

Volume 3, Book 50, Number 878:
Narrated Urwa:
Aisha told me that Buraira came to seek her help in writing for emancipation
and at that time she had not paid any part of her price. 'Aisha said to her,
"Go to your masters and if they agree that I will pay your price (and free
you) on condition that your Wala' will be for me, I will pay the money."
Buraira told her masters about that, but they refused, and said, "If 'Aisha
wants to do a favor she could, but your Wala will be for us." Aisha informed
Allah's Apostle of that and he said to her, "Buy and manumit Buraira as the
Wala' will go to the manumitted."

Volume 3, Book 50, Number 879:
Narrated Jabir:
While I was riding a (slow) and tired camel, the Prophet passed by and beat
it and prayed for Allah's Blessings for it. The camel became so fast as it had
never been before. The Prophet then said, "Sell it to me for one Uqiyya (of
gold)." I said, "No." He again said, "Sell it to me for one Uqiyya (of gold)." I
sold it and stipulated that I should ride it to my house. When we reached
(Medina) I took that camel to the Prophet and he gave me its price. I
returned home but he sent for me (and when I went to him) he said, "I will
not take your camel. Take your camel as a gift for you." (Various narrations
are mentioned here with slight variations in expressions relating the
condition that Jabir had the right to ride the sold camel up to Medina).

Volume 3, Book 50, Number 880:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Ansar said to the Prophet, "Divide our date-palms between us and our
emigrant brothers." The Prophet said, "No." The Ansar said to the
emigrants, "You may do the labor (in our gardens) and we will share the
fruits with you." The emigrants said, "We hear and obey."

Volume 3, Book 50, Number 881:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
Allah's Apostle gave the land of Khaibar to the Jews on the condition that
they would work on it and cultivate it and they would get half of its yield.

Volume 3, Book 50, Number 882:
Narrated Uqba bin Amir:
Allah's Apostle said, "From among all the conditions which you have to
fulfill, the conditions which make it legal for you to have sexual relations (i.e.
the marriage contract) have the greatest right to be fulfilled."
Volume 3, Book 50, Number 883:
Narrated Rafi bin Khadij:
We used to work on the fields more than the other Ansar, and we used to
rent the land (for the yield of a specific portion of it). But sometimes that
portion or the rest of the land did not give any yield, so we were forbidden
(by the Prophet ) to follow such a system, but we were allowed to rent the
land for money.

Volume 3, Book 50, Number 884:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "No town-dweller should sell for a bedouin. Do not
practice Najsh (i.e. Do not offer a high price for a thing which you do not
want to buy, in order to deceive the people). No Muslim should offer more
for a thing already bought by his Muslim brother, nor should he demand the
hand of a girl already engaged to another Muslim. A Muslim woman shall
not try to bring about The divorce of her sister (i.e. another Muslim woman)
in order to take her place herself."

Volume 3, Book 50, Number 885:
Narrated Abu Huraira and Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani:
A bedouin came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's apostle! I ask you by
Allah to judge My case according to Allah's Laws." His opponent, who was
more learned than he, said, "Yes, judge between us according to Allah's
Laws, and allow me to speak." Allah's Apostle said, "Speak." He (i .e. the
bedouin or the other man) said, "My son was working as a laborer for this
(man) and he committed illegal sexual intercourse with his wife. The people
told me that it was obligatory that my son should be stoned to death, so in
lieu of that I ransomed my son by paying one hundred sheep and a slave girl.
Then I asked the religious scholars about it, and they informed me that my
son must be lashed one hundred lashes, and be exiled for one year, and the
wife of this (man) must be stoned to death." Allah's Apostle said, "By Him in
Whose Hands my soul is, I will judge between you according to Allah's Laws.
The slave-girl and the sheep are to be returned to you, your son is to receive
a hundred lashes and be exiled for one year. You, Unais, go to the wife of
this (man) and if she confesses her guilt, stone her to death." Unais went to
that woman next morning and she confessed. Allah's Apostle ordered that
she be stoned to death.

Volume 3, Book 50, Number 886:
Narrated Aiman Al-Makki:
rs had stipulated that her Wala would be for them.' The Prophet said,

Volume 3, Book 50, Number 887:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle forbade (1) the meeting of the caravan (of goods) on the
way, (2) and that a residing person buys for a bedouin, (3) and that a woman
stipulates the divorce of the wife of the would-be husband, (4) and that a
man tries to cause the cancellation of a bargain concluded by another. He
also forbade An-Najsh (see Hadith 824) and that one withholds the milk in
the udder of the animal so that he may deceive people on selling it.

Volume 3, Book 50, Number 888:
Narrated Ubai bin Kab:
Allah's Apostle said, "Moses the Apostle of Allah," and then he narrated the
whole story about him. Al-Khadir said to Moses, "Did not I tell you that you
can have no patience with me." (18.72). Moses then violated the agreement
for the first time because of forgetfulness, then Moses promised that if he
asked Al-Khadir about anything, the latter would have the right to desert
him. Moses abided by that condition and on the third occasion he
intentionally asked Al-Khadir and caused that condition to be applied. The
three occasions referred to above are referred to by the following Verses:
"Call me not to account for forgetting And be not hard upon me." (18.73)
"Then they met a boy and Khadir killed him." (18.74)
"Then they proceeded and found a wall which was on the verge of falling
and Khadir set it up straight." (18.77)

Volume 3, Book 50, Number 889:
Narrated Urwa:
Aisha said, "Buraira came to me and said, 'My people (masters) have written
the contract for my emancipation for nine Awaq ) of gold) to be paid in
yearly installments, one Uqiyya per year; so help me." Aisha said (to her), "If
your masters agree, I will pay them the whole sum provided the Wala will be
for me." Buraira went to her masters and told them about it, but they
refused the offer and she returned from them while Allah's Apostles was
sitting. She said, "I presented the offer to them, but they refused unless the
Wala' would be for them." When the Prophet heard that and 'Aisha told him
about It, he said to her, "Buy Buraira and let them stipulate that her Wala'
will be for them, as the Wala' is for the manumitted." 'Aisha did so. After
that Allah's Apostle got up amidst the people, Glorified and Praised Allah
and said, "What is wrong with some people who stipulate things which are
not in Allah's Laws? Any condition which is not in Allah's Laws is invalid even
if there were a hundred such conditions. Allah's Rules are the most valid and
Allah's Conditions are the most solid. The Wala is for the manumitted."

Volume 3, Book 50, Number 890:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
When the people of Khaibar dislocated Abdullah bin Umar's hands and feet,
Umar got up delivering a sermon saying, "No doubt, Allah's Apostle made a
contract with the Jews concerning their properties, and said to them, 'We
allow you (to stand in your land) as long as Allah allows you.' Now Abdullah
bin Umar went to his land and was attacked at night, and his hands and feet
were dislocated, and as we have no enemies there except those Jews, they
are our enemies and the only people whom we suspect, I have made up my
mind to exile them." When Umar decided to carry out his decision, a son of
Abu Al-Haqiq's came and addressed 'Umar, "O chief of the believers, will you
exile us although Muhammad allowed us to stay at our places, and made a
contract with us about our properties, and accepted the condition of our
residence in our land?" 'Umar said, "Do you think that I have forgotten the
statement of Allah's Apostle, i.e.: What will your condition be when you are
expelled from Khaibar and your camel will be carrying you night after
night?" The Jew replied, "That was joke from Abu-l-Qasim." 'Umar said, "O
the enemy of Allah! You are telling a lie." 'Umar then drove them out and
paid them the price of their properties in the form of fruits, money, camel
saddles and ropes, etc."

Volume 3, Book 50, Number 891:
Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama and Marwan:
(whose narrations attest each other) Allah's Apostle set out at the time of
Al-Hudaibiya (treaty), and when they proceeded for a distance, he said,
"Khalid bin Al-Walid leading the cavalry of Quraish constituting the front of
the army, is at a place called Al-Ghamim, so take the way on the right." By
Allah, Khalid did not perceive the arrival of the Muslims till the dust arising
from the march of the Muslim army reached him, and then he turned back
hurriedly to inform Quraish. The Prophet went on advancing till he reached
the Thaniyya (i.e. a mountainous way) through which one would go to them
(i.e. people of Quraish). The she-camel of the Prophet sat down. The people
tried their best to cause the she-camel to get up but in vain, so they said, "AlQaswa' (i.e. the she-camel's name) has become stubborn! Al-Qaswa' has
become stubborn!" The Prophet said, "Al-Qaswa' has not become stubborn,
for stubbornness is not her habit, but she was stopped by Him Who stopped
the elephant." Then he said, "By the Name of Him in Whose Hands my soul
is, if they (i.e. the Quraish infidels) ask me anything which will respect the
ordinances of Allah, I will grant it to them."
The Prophet then rebuked the she-camel and she got up. The Prophet
changed his way till he dismounted at the farthest end of Al-Hudaibiya at a
pit (i.e. well) containing a little water which the people used in small
amounts, and in a short while the people used up all its water and
complained to Allah's Apostle; of thirst. The Prophet took an arrow out of
his arrow-case and ordered them to put the arrow in that pit. By Allah, the
water started and continued sprouting out till all the people quenched their
thirst and returned with satisfaction. While they were still in that state,
Budail bin Warqa-al-Khuza'i came with some persons from his tribe Khuza'a
and they were the advisers of Allah's Apostle who would keep no secret
from him and were from the people of Tihama. Budail said, "I left Kab bin
Luai and 'Amir bin Luai residing at the profuse water of Al-Hudaibiya and
they had milch camels (or their women and children) with them, and will
wage war against you, and will prevent you from visiting the Kaba." Allah's
Apostle said, "We have not come to fight anyone, but to perform the 'Umra.
No doubt, the war has weakened Quraish and they have suffered great
losses, so if they wish, I will conclude a truce with them, during which they
should refrain from interfering between me and the people (i.e. the 'Arab
infidels other than Quraish), and if I have victory over those infidels, Quraish
will have the option to embrace Islam as the other people do, if they wish;
they will at least get strong enough to fight. But if they do not accept the
truce, by Allah in Whose Hands my life is, I will fight with them defending my
Cause till I get killed, but (I am sure) Allah will definitely make His Cause
victorious." Budail said, "I will inform them of what you have said." So, he
set off till he reached Quraish and said, "We have come from that man (i.e.
Muhammad) whom we heard saying something which we will disclose to
you if you should like." Some of the fools among Quraish shouted that they
were not in need of this information, but the wiser among them said,
"Relate what you heard him saying." Budail said, "I heard him saying so-andso," relating what the Prophet had told him.
Urwa bin Mas'ud got up and said, "O people! Aren't you the sons? They said,
"Yes." He added, "Am I not the father?" They said, "Yes." He said, "Do you
mistrust me?" They said, "No." He said, "Don't you know that I invited the
people of 'Ukaz for your help, and when they refused I brought my relatives
and children and those who obeyed me (to help you)?" They said, "Yes." He
said, "Well, this man (i.e. the Prophet) has offered you a reasonable
proposal, you'd better accept it and allow me to meet him." They said, "You
may meet him." So, he went to the Prophet and started talking to him. The
Prophet told him almost the same as he had told Budail. Then Urwa said, "O
Muhammad! Won't you feel any scruple in extirpating your relations? Have
you ever heard of anyone amongst the Arabs extirpating his relatives before
you? On the other hand, if the reverse should happen, (nobody will aid you,
for) by Allah, I do not see (with you) dignified people, but people from
various tribes who would run away leaving you alone." Hearing that, Abu
Bakr abused him and said, "Do you say we would run and leave the Prophet
alone?" Urwa said, "Who is that man?" They said, "He is Abu Bakr." Urwa
said to Abu Bakr, "By Him in Whose Hands my life is, were it not for the favor
which you did to me and which I did not compensate, I would retort on
you." Urwa kept on talking to the Prophet and seizing the Prophet's beard
as he was talking while Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba was standing near the head of
the Prophet, holding a sword and wearing a helmet. Whenever Urwa
stretched his hand towards the beard of the Prophet, Al-Mughira would hit
his hand with the handle of the sword and say (to Urwa), "Remove your
hand from the beard of Allah's Apostle." Urwa raised his head and asked,
"Who is that?" The people said, "He is Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba." Urwa said, "O
treacherous! Am I not doing my best to prevent evil consequences of your
treachery?"
Before embracing Islam Al-Mughira was in the company of some people. He
killed them and took their property and came (to Medina) to embrace Islam.
The Prophet said (to him, "As regards your Islam, I accept it, but as for the
property I do not take anything of it. (As it was taken through treason).
Urwa then started looking at the Companions of the Prophet. By Allah,
whenever Allah's Apostle spat, the spittle would fall in the hand of one of
them (i.e. the Prophet's companions) who would rub it on his face and skin;
if he ordered them they would carry his orders immediately; if he performed
ablution, they would struggle to take the remaining water; and when they
spoke to him, they would lower their voices and would not look at his face
constantly out of respect. Urwa returned to his people and said, "O people!
By Allah, I have been to the kings and to Caesar, Khosrau and An-Najashi, yet
I have never seen any of them respected by his courtiers as much as
Muhammad is respected by his companions. By Allah, if he spat, the spittle
would fall in the hand of one of them (i.e. the Prophet's companions) who
would rub it on his face and skin; if he ordered them, they would carry out
his order immediately; if he performed ablution, they would struggle to take
the remaining water; and when they spoke, they would lower their voices
and would not look at his face constantly out of respect." Urwa added, "No
doubt, he has presented to you a good reasonable offer, so please accept
it." A man from the tribe of Bani Kinana said, "Allow me to go to him," and
they allowed him, and when he approached the Prophet and his
companions, Allah's Ap le I said, "He is so-and-so who belongs to the tribe
that respects the Budn (i.e. camels of the sacrifice). So, bring the Budn in
front of him." So, the Budn were brought before him and the people
received him while they were reciting Talbiya. When he saw that scene, he
said, "Glorified be Allah! It is not fair to prevent these people from visiting
the Ka'ba." When he returned to his people, he said, 'I saw the Budn
garlanded (with colored knotted ropes) and marked (with stabs on their
backs). I do not think it is advisable to prevent them from visiting the Ka'ba."
Another person called Mikraz bin Hafs got up and sought their permission to
go to Muhammad, and they allowed him, too. When he approached the
Muslims, the Prophet said, "Here is Mikraz and he is a vicious man." Mikraz
started talking to the Prophet and as he was talking, Suhail bin Amr came.
When Suhail bin Amr came, the Prophet said, "Now the matter has become
easy." Suhail said to the Prophet "Please conclude a peace treaty with us."
So, the Prophet called the clerk and said to him, "Write: By the Name of
Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful." Suhail said, "As for
'Beneficent,' by Allah, I do not know what it means. So write: By Your Name
O Allah, as you used to write previously." The Muslims said, "By Allah, we
will not write except: By the Name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most
Merciful." The Prophet said, "Write: By Your Name O Allah." Then he
dictated, "This is the peace treaty which Muhammad, Allah's Apostle has
concluded." Suhail said, "By Allah, if we knew that you are Allah's Apostle
we would not prevent you from visiting the Kaba, and would not fight with
you. So, write: "Muhammad bin Abdullah." The Prophet said, "By Allah! I am
Apostle of Allah even if you people do not believe me. Write: Muhammad
bin Abdullah." (Az-Zuhri said, "The Prophet accepted all those things, as he
had already said that he would accept everything they would demand if it
respects the ordinance of Allah, (i.e. by letting him and his companions
perform 'Umra.)" The Prophet said to Suhail, "On the condition that you
allow us to visit the House (i.e. Ka'ba) so that we may perform Tawaf around
it." Suhail said, "By Allah, we will not (allow you this year) so as not to give
chance to the 'Arabs to say that we have yielded to you, but we will allow
you next year." So, the Prophet got that written.
Then Suhail said, "We also stipulate that you should return to us whoever
comes to you from us, even if he embraced your religion." The Muslims said,
"Glorified be Allah! How will such a person be returned to the pagans after
he has become a Muslim? While they were in this state Abu- Jandal bin
Suhail bin 'Amr came from the valley of Mecca staggering with his fetters
and fell down amongst the Muslims. Suhail said, "O Muhammad! This is the
very first term with which we make peace with you, i.e. you shall return Abu
Jandal to me." The Prophet said, "The peace treaty has not been written
yet." Suhail said, "I will never allow you to keep him." The Prophet said,
"Yes, do." He said, "I won't do.: Mikraz said, "We allow you (to keep him)."
Abu Jandal said, "O Muslims! Will I be returned to the pagans though I have
come as a Muslim? Don't you see how much I have suffered?"
Abu Jandal had been tortured severely for the Cause of Allah. Umar bin AlKhattab said, "I went to the Prophet and said, 'Aren't you truly the Apostle
of Allah?' The Prophet said, 'Yes, indeed.' I said, 'Isn't our Cause just and the
cause of the enemy unjust?' He said, 'Yes.' I said, 'Then why should we be
humble in our religion?' He said, 'I am Allah's Apostle and I do not disobey
Him, and He will make me victorious.' I said, 'Didn't you tell us that we would
go to the Ka'ba and perform Tawaf around it?' He said, 'Yes, but did I tell you
that we would visit the Ka'ba this year?' I said, 'No.' He said, 'So you will visit
it and perform Tawaf around it?' " Umar further said, "I went to Abu Bakr
and said, 'O Abu Bakr! Isn't he truly Allah's Prophet?' He replied, 'Yes.' I said,
'Then why should we be humble in our religion?' He said, 'Indeed, he is
Allah's Apostle and he does not disobey his Lord, and He will make him
victorious. Adhere to him as, by Allah, he is on the right.' I said, 'Was he not
telling us that we would go to the Kaba and perform Tawaf around it?' He
said, 'Yes, but did he tell you that you would go to the Ka'ba this year?' I
said, 'No.' He said, "You will go to Ka'ba and perform Tawaf around it." (AzZuhri said, " 'Umar said, 'I performed many good deeds as expiation for the
improper questions I asked them.' ")
When the writing of the peace treaty was concluded, Allah's Apostle said to
his companions, "Get up and' slaughter your sacrifices and get your head
shaved." By Allah none of them got up, and the Prophet repeated his order
thrice. When none of them got up, he left them and went to Um Salama and
told her of the people's attitudes towards him. Um Salama said, "O the
Prophet of Allah! Do you want your order to be carried out? Go out and
don't say a word to anybody till you have slaughtered your sacrifice and call
your barber to shave your head." So, the Prophet went out and did not talk
to anyone of them till he did that, i.e. slaughtered the sacrifice and called his
barber who shaved his head. Seeing that, the companions of the Prophet
got up, slaughtered their sacrifices, and started shaving the heads of one
another, and there was so much rush that there was a danger of killing each
other. Then some believing women came (to the Prophet ); and Allah
revealed the following Divine Verses:-"O you who believe, when the believing women come to you as emigrants
examine them . . ." (60.10)
Umar then divorced two wives of his who were infidels. Later on Muawiya
bin Abu Sufyan married one of them, and Safwan bin Umaya married the
other. When the Prophet returned to Medina, Abu Basir, a new Muslim
convert from Quraish came to him. The Infidels sent in his pursuit two men
who said (to the Prophet ), "Abide by the promise you gave us." So, the
Prophet handed him over to them. They took him out (of the City) till they
reached Dhul-Hulaifa where they dismounted to eat some dates they had
with them. Abu Basir said to one of them, "By Allah, O so-and-so, I see you
have a fine sword." The other drew it out (of the scabbard) and said, "By
Allah, it is very fine and I have tried it many times." Abu Bair said, "Let me
have a look at it."
When the other gave it to him, he hit him with it till he died, and his
companion ran away till he came to Medina and entered the Mosque
running. When Allah's Apostle saw him he said, "This man appears to have
been frightened." When he reached the Prophet he said, "My companion
has been murdered and I would have been murdered too." Abu Basir came
and said, "O Allah's Apostle, by Allah, Allah has made you fulfill your
obligations by your returning me to them (i.e. the Infidels), but Allah has
saved me from them." The Prophet said, "Woe to his mother! what
excellent war kindler he would be, should he only have supporters." When
Abu Basir heard that he understood that the Prophet would return him to
them again, so he set off till he reached the seashore. Abu Jandal bin Suhail
got himself released from them (i.e. infidels) and joined Abu Basir. So,
whenever a man from Quraish embraced Islam he would follow Abu Basir till
they formed a strong group. By Allah, whenever they heard about a caravan
of Quraish heading towards Sham, they stopped it and attacked and killed
them (i.e. infidels) and took their properties. The people of Quraish sent a
message to the Prophet requesting him for the Sake of Allah and Kith and
kin to send for (i.e. Abu Basir and his companions) promising that whoever
(amongst them) came to the Prophet would be secure. So the Prophet sent
for them (i.e. Abu Basir's companions) and Allah I revealed the following
Divine Verses:
"And it is He Who Has withheld their hands from you and your hands From
them in the midst of Mecca, After He made you the victorious over them. . . .
the unbelievers had pride and haughtiness, in their hearts . . . the pride and
haughtiness of the time of ignorance." (48.24-26) And their pride and
haughtiness was that they did not confess (write in the treaty) that he (i.e.
Muhammad) was the Prophet of Allah and refused to write: "In the Name of
Allah, the most Beneficent, the Most Merciful," and prevented the Mushriks
from visiting the Ka'ba.
Narrated Az-Zuhri: Urwa said, "Aisha told me that Allah's Apostle used to
examine the women emigrants. We have been told also that when Allah
revealed the order that the Muslims should return to the pagans what they
had spent on their wives who emigrated (after embracing Islam) and that
the Mushriks should not. keep unbelieving women as their wives, 'Umar
divorced two of his wives, Qariba, the daughter of Abu Urhaiya and the
daughter of Jarwal Al-Khuza'i. Later on Mu'awlya married Qariba and Abu
Jahm married the other."
When the pagans refused to pay what the Muslims had spent on their wives,
Allah revealed: "And if any of your wives have gone from you to the
unbelievers and you have an accession (By the coming over of a woman
from the other side) (Then pay to those whose wives have gone) The
equivalent of what they had spent (On their Mahr)." (60.11)
So, Allah ordered that the Muslim whose wife, has gone, should be given, as
a compensation of the Mahr he had given to his wife, from the Mahr of the
wives of the pagans who had emigrated deserting their husbands.
We do not know any of the women emigrants who deserted Islam after
embracing it. We have also been told that Abu Basir bin Asid Ath-Thaqafi
came to the Prophet as a Muslim emigrant during the truce. Al-Akhnas bin
Shariq wrote to the Prophet requesting him to return Abu Basir.

Volume 3, Book 50, Number 892:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle mentioned a person who asked an Israeli man to lend him
one-thousand Dinars, and the Israeli lent him the sum for a certain fixed
period.

Volume 3, Book 50, Number 893:
Narrated Amra:
Aisha said that Buraira came to seek her help in the writing of her
emancipation. 'Aisha said to her, "If you wish, I will pay your masters (your
price) and the wala' will be for me." When Allah's Apostle came, she told
him about it. The Prophet said to her, "Buy her (i.e. Buraira) and manumit
her, for the Wala is for the one who manumits." Then Allah's Apostle
ascended the pulpit and said, "What about those people who stipulate
conditions which are not in Allah's Laws? Whoever stipulates such
conditions as are not in Allah's Laws, then those conditions are invalid even
if he stipulated a hundred such conditions."

Volume 3, Book 50, Number 894:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah has ninety-nine names, i.e. one-hundred minus
one, and whoever knows them will go to Paradise." (Please see Hadith No.
419 Vol. 8)

Volume 3, Book 50, Number 895:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Umar bin Khattab got some land in Khaibar and he went to the Prophet to
consult him about it saying, "O Allah' Apostle got some land in Khaibar
better than which I have never had, what do you suggest that I do with it?"
The Prophet said, "If you like you can give the land as endowment and give
its fruits in charity." So Umar gave it in charity as an endowment on the
condition that would not be sold nor given to anybody as a present and not
to be inherited, but its yield would be given in charity to the poor people, to
the Kith and kin, for freeing slaves, for Allah's Cause, to the travelers and
guests; and that there would be no harm if the guardian of the endowment
ate from it according to his need with good intention, and fed others
without storing it for the future."
VOLUME 4
BOOK 51. WILLS AND TESTAMENTS (WASAAYAA) (1-40)
Volume 4, Book 51, Number 1:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: Allah's Apostle said, "It is not permissible for
any Muslim who has something to will to stay for two nights without having
his last will and testament written and kept ready with him."

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 2:
Narrated Amr bin Al-Harith:
(The brother of the wife of Allah's Apostle. Juwaira bint Al-Harith) When
Allah's Apostle died, he did not leave any Dirham or Dinar (i.e. money), a
slave or a slave woman or anything else except his white mule, his arms and
a piece of land which he had given in charity .

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 3:
Narrated Talha bin Musarrif:
I asked 'Abdullah bin Abu Aufa "Did the Prophet make a will?" He replied,
"No," I asked him, "How is it then that the making of a will has been
enjoined on people, (or that they are ordered to make a will)?" He replied,
"The Prophet bequeathed Allah's Book (i.e. Quran)."

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 4:
Narrated Al-Aswad:
In the presence of 'Aisha some people mentioned that the Prophet had
appointed 'Ali by will as his successor. 'Aisha said, "When did he appoint him
by will? Verily when he died he was resting against my chest (or said: in my
lap) and he asked for a wash-basin and then collapsed while in that state,
and I could not even perceive that he had died, so when did he appoint him
by will?"

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 5:
Narrated Sad bin Abu Waqqas:
The Prophet came visiting me while I was (sick) in Mecca, ('Amir the subnarrator said, and he disliked to die in the land, whence he had already
migrated). He (i.e. the Prophet) said, "May Allah bestow His Mercy on Ibn
Afra (Sad bin Khaula)." I said, "O Allah's Apostle! May I will all my property
(in charity)?" He said, "No." I said, "Then may I will half of it?" He said, "No". I
said, "One third?" He said: "Yes, one third, yet even one third is too much. It
is better for you to leave your inheritors wealthy than to leave them poor
begging others, and whatever you spend for Allah's sake will be considered
as a charitable deed even the handful of food you put in your wife's mouth.
Allah may lengthen your age so that some people may benefit by you, and
some others be harmed by you." At that time Sad had only one daughter.

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 6:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
I recommend that people reduce the proportion of what they bequeath by
will to the fourth (of the whole legacy), for Allah's Apostle said, "One-third,
yet even one third is too much."

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 7:
Narrated Sad:
I fell sick and the Prophet paid me a visit. I said to him, "O Allah's Apostle! I
invoke Allah that He may not let me expire in the land whence I migrated
(i.e. Mecca)." He said, "May Allah give you health and let the people benefit
by you." I said, "I want to will my property, and I have only one daughter and
I want to will half of my property (to be given in charity)." He said," Half is
too much." I said, "Then I will one third." He said, "One-third, yet even onethird is too much." (The narrator added, "So the people started to will one
third of their property and that was Permitted for them.")

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 8:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) Utba bin Abi Waqqas entrusted (his son) to his
brother Sad bin Abi Waqqas saying, "The son of the slave-girl of Zam'a is my
(illegal) son, take him into your custody." So during the year of the Conquest
(of Mecca) Sad took the boy and said, "This is my brother's son whom my
brother entrusted to me." 'Abu bin Zam's got up and said, "He is my brother
and the son of the slave girl of my father and was born on my father's bed."
Then both of them came to Allah's Apostle and Sad said, "O Allah's Apostle!
This is my brother's son whom my brother entrusted to me."
Then 'Abu bin Zam'a got up and said, "This is my brother and the son of the
slave-girl of my father." Allah's Apostle said, "O Abu bin Zam'a! This boy is
for you as the boy belongs to the bed (where he was born), and for the
adulterer is the stone (i.e. deprivation)." Then the Prophet said to his wife
Sauda bint Zam'a, "Screen yourself from this boy," when he saw the boy's
resemblance to 'Utba. Since then the boy did not see Sauda till he died.

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 9:
Narrated Anas:
A Jew crushed the head of a girl between two stones. She was asked, "Who
has done so to you, so-and-so? So-and-so?" Till the name of the Jew was
mentioned, whereupon she nodded (in agreement). So the Jew was
brought and was questioned till he confessed. The Prophet then ordered
that his head be crushed with stones.
Volume 4, Book 51, Number 10:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The custom (in old days) was that the property of the deceased would be
inherited by his offspring; as for the parents (of the deceased), they would
inherit by the will of the deceased. Then Allah cancelled from that custom
whatever He wished and fixed for the male double the amount inherited by
the female, and for each parent a sixth (of the whole legacy) and for the
wife an eighth or a fourth and for the husband a half or a fourth.

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 11:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man asked the Prophet, "O Allah's Apostle! What kind of charity is the
best?" He replied. "To give in charity when you are healthy and greedy
hoping to be wealthy and afraid of becoming poor. Don't delay giving in
charity till the time when you are on the death bed when you say, 'Give so
much to so-and-so and so much to so-and so,' and at that time the property
is not yours but it belongs to so-and-so (i.e. your inheritors)."

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 12:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The signs of a hypocrite are three: Whenever he speaks
he tells a lie; whenever he is entrusted he proves dishonest; whenever he
promises he breaks his promise."

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 13:
Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair: Hakim bin Hizam said, "I asked Allah's Apostle
for something, and he gave me, and I asked him again and he gave me and
said, 'O Hakim! This wealth is green and sweet (i.e. as tempting as fruits),
and whoever takes it with
The upper (i.e. giving) hand is better than the lower (i.e. taking) hand."
Hakim added, "I said, O Allah's Apostle! By Him Who has sent you with the
Truth I will never demand anything from anybody after you till I die."
Afterwards Abu Bakr used to call Hakim to give him something but he
refused to accept anything from him. Then 'Umar called him to give him
(something) but he refused. Then 'Umar said, "O Muslims! I offered to him
(i.e. Hakim) his share which Allah has ordained for him from this booty and
he refuses to take it." Thus Hakim did not ask anybody for anything after the
Prophet, till he died--may Allah bestow His mercy upon him.

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 14:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "All of you are guardians and responsible for
your charges: the Ruler (i.e. Imam) is a guardian and responsible for his
subjects; and a man is a guardian of his family and is responsible for his
charges; and a lady is a guardian in the house of her husband and is
responsible for her charge; and a servant is a guardian of the property of his
master and is responsible for his charge." I think he also said, "And a man is
a guardian of the property of his father."

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 15:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said to Abu Talha, "I recommend that you divide (this garden)
amongst your relatives." Abu Talha said, "O Allah's Apostle! I will do the
same." So Abu Talha divided it among his relatives and cousins.
Ibn 'Abbes said, "When the Qur'anic Verse:
"Warn your nearest kinsmen." (26.214)
Was revealed, the Prophet started calling the various big families of Quraish,
"O Bani Fihr! O Bani Adi!".
Abu Huraira said, "When the Verse: "Warn your nearest kinsmen" was
revealed, the Prophet said (in a loud voice), "O people of Quraish!"

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 16:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
When Allah revealed the Verse: "Warn your nearest kinsmen," Allah's
Apostle got up and said, "O people of Quraish (or said similar words)! Buy
(i.e. save) yourselves (from the Hellfire) as I cannot save you from Allah's
Punishment; O Bani Abd Manaf! I cannot save you from Allah's Punishment,
O Safiya, the Aunt of Allah's Apostle! I cannot save you from Allah's
Punishment; O Fatima bint Muhammad! Ask me anything from my wealth,
but I cannot save you from Allah's Punishment."

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 17:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet saw a man driving a Badana (i.e. camel for sacrifice) and said to
him, "Ride on it." The man said, "O Allah's Apostle! It is a Bandana." (The
Prophet repeated his order) and on the third or fourth time he said, "Ride it,
(woe to you" or said: "May Allah be merciful to you)."

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 18:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle saw a man driving a Badana and said to him, "Ride on it," and
on the second or the third time he added, "Woe to you."

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 19:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The mother of Sad bin 'Ubada died in his absence. He said, "O Allah's
Apostle! My mother died in my absence; will it be of any benefit for her if I
give Sadaqa on her behalf?" The Prophet said, "Yes," Sad said, "I make you a
witness that I gave my garden called Al Makhraf in charity on her behalf."

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 20:
Narrated Kab bin Malik:
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! For the acceptance of my repentance I wish to give
all my property in charity for Allah's sake through His Apostle ." He said, "It
is better for you to keep some of the property for yourself." I said, "Then I
will keep my share in Khaibar."

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 21:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Some people claim that the order in the above Verse is cancelled, by Allah, it
is not cancelled, but the people have stopped acting on it. There are two
kinds of guardians (who are in charge of the inheritance): One is that who
inherits; such a person should give (of what he inherits to the relatives, the
orphans and the needy, etc.), the other is that who does not inherit (e.g. the
guardian of the orphans): such a person should speak kindly and say (to
those who are present at the time of distribution), "I can not give it to you
(as the wealth belongs to the orphans)."

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 22:
Narrated 'Aisha:
A man said to the Prophet, "My mother died suddenly, and I think that if she
could speak, she would have given in charity. May I give in charity on her
behalf?" He said, "Yes! Give in charity on her behalf."
Volume 4, Book 51, Number 23:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Sad bin Ubada consulted Allah's Apostle saying, "My mother died and she
had an unfulfilled vow." The Prophet said, "Fulfill it on her behalf."

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 24:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
That the mother of Sad bin Ubada the brother of Bani Saida died in Sad's
absence, so he came to the Prophet saying, "O Allah's Apostle! My mother
died in my absence, will it benefit her if I give in charity on her behalf?" The
Prophet said, "Yes." Sad said, "I take you as my witness that I give my
garden Al-Makhraf in charity on her behalf."

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 25:
Narrated Az-Zuhri:
Urwa bin Az-Zubair said that he asked 'Aisha about the meaning of the
Quranic Verse:-"And if you fear that you will not deal fairly with the orphan girls then marry
(other) women of your choice." (4.2-3)
Aisha said, "It is about a female orphan under the guardianship of her
guardian who is inclined towards her because of her beauty and wealth, and
likes to marry her with a Mahr less than what is given to women of her
standard. So they (i.e. guardians) were forbidden to marry the orphans
unless they paid them a full appropriate Mahr (otherwise) they were
ordered to marry other women instead of them. Later on the people asked
Allah's Apostle about it. So Allah revealed the following Verse:-"They ask your instruction (O Muhammad!) regarding women. Say: Allah
instructs you regarding them..." (4.127)
and in this Verse Allah indicated that if the orphan girl was beautiful and
wealthy, her guardian would have the desire to marry her without giving her
an appropriate Mahr equal to what her peers could get, but if she was
undesirable for lack of beauty or wealth, then he would not marry her, but
seek to marry some other woman instead of her. So, since he did not marry
her when he had no inclination towards her, he had not the right to marry
her when he had an interest in her, unless he treated her justly by giving her
a full Mahr and securing all her rights.

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 26:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
In the lifetime of Allah's Apostle , Umar gave in charity some of his property,
a garden of date-palms called Thamgh. 'Umar said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have
some property which I prize highly and I want to give it in charity." The
Prophet; said, "Give it in charity (i.e. as an endowment) with its land and
trees on the condition that the land and trees will neither be sold nor given
as a present, nor bequeathed, but the fruits are to be spent in charity." So
'Umar gave it in charity, and it was for Allah's Cause, the emancipation of
slaves, for the poor, for guests, for travelers, and for kinsmen. The person
acting as its administrator could eat from it reasonably and fairly, and could
let a friend of his eat from it provided he had no intention of becoming
wealthy by its means.

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 27:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The following Verse:-"If a guardian is well-off, let him claim no remuneration (i.e. wages), but if he
is poor, let him have for himself what is just and reasonable." (4.6)
was revealed in connection with the guardian of an orphan, and it means
that if he is poor he can have for himself (from the orphan's wealth) what is
just and reasonable according to the orphan's share of the inheritance.

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 28:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Avoid the seven great destructive sins." The people
enquire, "O Allah's Apostle! What are they? "He said, "To join others in
worship along with Allah, to practice sorcery, to kill the life which Allah has
forbidden except for a just cause, (according to Islamic law), to eat up Riba
(usury), to eat up an orphan's wealth, to give back to the enemy and fleeing
from the battlefield at the time of fighting, and to accuse, chaste women,
who never even think of anything touching chastity and are good believers.

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 29:
Narrated Anas:
When Allah's Apostle came to Medina; he did not have any servant. Abu
Talha (Anas' step-father) took me to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Anas is a wise boy, so let him serve you." So, I served him at home
and on journeys. If I did anything, he never asked me why I did it, and if I
refrained from doing anything, he never asked me why I refrained from
doing it.

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 30:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Abu Talha had the greatest wealth of date-palms amongst the Ansar in
Medina, and he prized above all his wealth (his garden) Bairuha', which was
situated opposite the Mosque (of the Prophet ). The Prophet used to enter
It and drink from its fresh water. When the following Divine Verse came:--
"By no means shall you attain piety until you spend of what you love," (3.92)
Abu Talha got up saying. "O Allah's Apostle! Allah says, 'You will not attain
piety until you spend of what you love,' and I prize above al I my wealth,
Bairuha' which I want to give in charity for Allah's Sake, hoping for its
reward from Allah. So you can use it as Allah directs you." On that the
Prophet said, "Bravo! It is a profitable (or perishable) property. (Ibn
Maslama is not sure as to which word is right, i.e. profitable or perishable.) I
have heard what you have said, and I recommend that you distribute this
amongst your relatives." On that Abu Talha said, "O Allah's Apostle! I will do
(as you have suggested)." So, Abu Talha distributed that garden amongst
his relatives and cousins.

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 31:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
A man said to Allah's Apostle , "My mother died, will it benefit her if I give in
charity on her behalf?" The Prophet replied in the affirmative. The man said,
"I have a garden and I make you a witness that I give it in charity on her
behalf."

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 32:
Narrated Anas:
When the Prophet ordered that the mosque be built, he said, "O Bani AnNajjar! Suggest to me a price for this garden of yours." They replied, "By
Allah! We will demand its price from none but Allah."

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 33:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
When 'Umar got a piece of land in Khaibar, he came to the Prophet saying,
"I have got a piece of land, better than which I have never got. So what do
you advise me regarding it?" The Prophet said, "If you wish you can keep it
as an endowment to be used for charitable purposes." So, 'Umar gave the
land in charity (i.e. as an endowments on the condition that the land would
neither be sold nor given as a present, nor bequeathed, (and its yield) would
be used for the poor, the kinsmen, the emancipation of slaves, Jihad, and for
guests and travelers; and its administrator could eat in a reasonable just
manner, and he also could feed his friends without intending to be wealthy
by its means."

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 34:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Umar got some property in Khaibar and he came to the Prophet and
informed him about it. The Prophet said to him, "If you wish you can give it
in charity." So 'Umar gave it in charity (i.e. as an endowment) the yield of
which was to be used for the good of the poor, the needy, the kinsmen and
the guests.

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 35:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
When Allah's Apostle came to Medina, he ordered that a mosque be built.
He said, "O Bani An-Najjar! Suggest me a price for the garden of yours." They
replied, "By Allah, we will not ask its price except from Allah."

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 36:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Once 'Umar gave a horse in charity to be used in holy fighting. It had been
given to him by Allah's Apostle . 'Umar gave it to another man to ride. Then
'Umar was informed that the man put the horse for sale, so he asked Allah's
Apostle whether he could buy it. Allah's Apostle replied, "You should not
buy it, for you should not take back what you have given in charity."

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 37:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "My heirs will not inherit a Dinar or a Dirham (i.e.
money), for whatever I leave (excluding the adequate support of my wives
and the wages of my employees) is given in charity."

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 38:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
When 'Umar founded an endowment he stipulated that its administrator
could eat from it and also feed his friend on the condition that he would not
store anything for himself from it.

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 39:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said (at the time of building the Mosque), "O Ban, An-Najjar!
Suggest to me a price for your garden." They replied, "We do not ask its
price except from Allah."

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 40:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah Al-Ansari:
My father was martyred on the day (of the Ghazwa) of Uhud and left six
daughters and some debts to be paid. When the time of plucking the datefruits came, I went to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! you know
that my father was martyred on Uhud's day and owed much debt, and I wish
that the creditors would see you." The Prophet said, "Go and collect the
various kinds of dates and place them separately in heaps"'
I did accordingly and called him. On seeing him, the creditors started
claiming their rights pressingly at that time. When the Prophet saw how
they behaved, he went round the biggest heap for three times and sat over
it and said,
"Call your companions (i.e. the creditors)." Then he kept on measuring and
giving them, till Allah cleared all my father's debts. By Allah, it would have
pleased me that Allah would clear the debts of my father even though I had
not taken a single date to my sisters. But by Allah, all the heaps were
complete, (as they were) and I looked at the heap where Allah's Apostle was
sitting and noticed as if not a single date had been taken thereof.
BOOK 52. FIGHTING FOR THE CAUSE OF ALLAH (JIHAAD) (41-323)
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 41:
Narrated Abdullah bin Masud:
I asked Allah's Apostle, "O Allah's Apostle! What is the best deed?" He
replied, "To offer the prayers at their early stated fixed times." I asked,
"What is next in goodness?" He replied, "To be good and dutiful to your
parents." I further asked, what is next in goodness?" He replied, "To
participate in Jihad in Allah's Cause." I did not ask Allah's Apostle anymore
and if I had asked him more, he would have told me more.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 42:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle said, "There is no Hijra (i.e. migration) (from Mecca to
Medina) after the Conquest (of Mecca), but Jihad and good intention
remain; and if you are called (by the Muslim ruler) for fighting, go forth
immediately.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 43:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(That she said), "O Allah's Apostle! We consider Jihad as the best deed.
Should we not fight in Allah's Cause?" He said, "The best Jihad (for women)
is Hajj-Mabrur (i.e. Hajj which is done according to the Prophet's tradition
and is accepted by Allah)."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 44:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man came to Allah's Apostle and said, "Instruct me as to such a deed as
equals Jihad (in reward)." He replied, "I do not find such a deed." Then he
added, "Can you, while the Muslim fighter is in the battle-field, enter your
mosque to perform prayers without cease and fast and never break your
fast?" The man said, "But who can do that?" Abu- Huraira added, "The
Mujahid (i.e. Muslim fighter) is rewarded even for the footsteps of his horse
while it wanders bout (for grazing) tied in a long rope."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 45:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Somebody asked, "O Allah's Apostle! Who is the best among the people?"
Allah's Apostle replied "A believer who strives his utmost in Allah's Cause
with his life and property." They asked, "Who is next?" He replied, "A
believer who stays in one of the mountain paths worshipping Allah and
leaving the people secure from his mischief."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 46:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "The example of a Mujahid in Allah's Cause-and Allah knows better who really strives in His Cause----is like a person who
fasts and prays continuously. Allah guarantees that He will admit the
Mujahid in His Cause into Paradise if he is killed, otherwise He will return him
to his home safely with rewards and war booty."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 47:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle used to visit Um Haran bint Milhan, who would offer him
reals. Um-Haram was the wife of Ubada bin As-Samit. Allah's Apostle, once
visited her and she provided him with food and started looking for lice in his
head. Then Allah's Apostle slept, and afterwards woke up smiling. Um Haran
asked, "What causes you to smile, O Allah's Apostle?" He said. "Some of my
followers who (in a dream) were presented before me as fighters in Allah's
Cause (on board a ship) amidst this sea cause me to smile; they were as
kings on the thrones (or like kings on the thrones)." (Ishaq, a sub-narrator is
not sure as to which expression the Prophet used.) Um-Haram said, "O
Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah that he makes me one of them. Allah's Apostle
invoked Allah for her and slept again and woke up smiling. Once again Um
Haram asked, "What makes you smile, O Allah's Apostle?" He replied, "Some
of my followers were presented to me as fighters in Allah's Cause,"
repeating the same dream. Um-Haram said, "O Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah
that He makes me one of them." He said, "You are amongst the first ones."
It happened that she sailed on the sea during the Caliphate of Mu'awlya bin
Abi Sufyan, and after she disembarked, she fell down from her riding animal
and died.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 48:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Whoever believes in Allah and His Apostle, offer prayer
perfectly and fasts the month of Ramadan, will rightfully be granted
Paradise by Allah, no matter whether he fights in Allah's Cause or remains in
the land where he is born." The people said, "O Allah's Apostle ! Shall we
acquaint the people with the is good news?" He said, "Paradise has onehundred grades which Allah has reserved for the Mujahidin who fight in His
Cause, and the distance between each of two grades is like the distance
between the Heaven and the Earth. So, when you ask Allah (for something),
ask for Al-firdaus which is the best and highest part of Paradise." (i.e. The
sub-narrator added, "I think the Prophet also said, 'Above it (i.e. Al-Firdaus)
is the Throne of Beneficent (i.e. Allah), and from it originate the rivers of
Paradise.")

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 49:
Narrated Samura:
The Prophet said, "Last night two men came to me (in a dream) and made
me ascend a tree and then admitted me into a better and superior house,
better of which I have never seen. One of them said, 'This house is the house
of martyrs."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 50:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "A single endeavor (of fighting) in Allah's Cause in the
forenoon or in the afternoon is better than the world and whatever is in it."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 51:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "A place in Paradise as small as a bow is better than all
that on which the sun rises and sets (i.e. all the world)." He also said, "A
single endeavor in Allah's Cause in the afternoon or in the forenoon is better
than all that on which the sun rises and sets."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 52:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
The Prophet said, "A single endeavor in Allah's Cause in the afternoon and in
the forenoon is better than the world and whatever is in it."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 53:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "Nobody who dies and finds good from Allah (in the
Hereafter) would wish to come back to this world even if he were given the
whole world and whatever is in it, except the martyr who, on seeing the
superiority of martyrdom, would like to come back to the world and get
killed again (in Allah's Cause)."
Narrated Anas: The Prophet said, "A single endeavor (of fighting) in Allah's
Cause in the afternoon or in the forenoon is better than all the world and
whatever is in it. A place in Paradise as small as the bow or lash of one of you
is better than all the world and whatever is in it. And if a houri from Paradise
appeared to the people of the earth, she would fill the space between
Heaven and the Earth with light and pleasant scent and her head cover is
better than the world and whatever is in it."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 54:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "By Him in Whose Hands my life is! Were it not for some
men amongst the believers who dislike to be left behind me and whom I
cannot provide with means of conveyance, I would certainly never remain
behind any Sariya' (army-unit) setting out in Allah's Cause. By Him in Whose
Hands my life is! I would love to be martyred in Al1ah's Cause and then get
resurrected and then get martyred, and then get resurrected again and then
get martyred and then get resurrected again and then get martyred.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 55:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet delivered a sermon and said, "Zaid took the flag and was
martyred, and then Ja'far took the flag and was martyred, and then
'Abdullah bin Rawaha took the flag and was martyred too, and then Khalid
bin Al-Walid took the flag though he was not appointed as a commander
and Allah made him victorious." The Prophet further added, "It would not
please us to have them with us." Aiyub, a sub-narrator, added, "Or the
Prophet, shedding tears, said, 'It would not p ease them to be with us."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 56:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Um Haram said, "Once the Prophet slept in my house near to me and got up
smiling. I said, 'What makes you smile?' He replied, 'Some of my followers
who (i.e. in a dream) were presented to me sailing on this green sea like
kings on thrones.' I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah to make me one of
them." So the Prophet invoked Allah for her and went to sleep again. He did
the same (i.e. got up and told his dream) and Um Haran repeated her
question and he gave the same reply. She said, "Invoke Allah to make me
one of them." He said, "You are among the first batch." Later on it
happened that she went out in the company of her husband 'Ubada bin AsSamit who went for Jihad and it was the first time the Muslims undertook a
naval expedition led by Mu awiya. When the expedition came to an end and
they were returning to Sham, a riding animal was presented to her to ride,
but the animal let her fall and thus she died.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 57:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet sent seventy men from the tribe of Bani Salim to the tribe of
Bani Amir. When they reached there, my maternal uncle said to them, "I will
go ahead of you, and if they allow me to convey the message of Allah's
Apostle (it will be all right); otherwise you will remain close to me." So he
went ahead of them and the pagans granted him security But while he was
reporting the message of the Prophet , they beckoned to one of their men
who stabbed him to death. My maternal uncle said, "Allah is Greater! By the
Lord of the Kaba, I am successful." After that they attached the rest of the
party and killed them all except a lame man who went up to the top of the
mountain. (Hammam, a sub-narrator said, "I think another man was saved
along with him)." Gabriel informed the Prophet that they (i.e the martyrs)
met their Lord, and He was pleased with them and made them pleased. We
used to recite, "Inform our people that we have met our Lord, He is pleased
with us and He has made us pleased " Later on this Quranic Verse was
cancelled. The Prophet invoked Allah for forty days to curse the murderers
from the tribe of Ral, Dhakwan, Bani Lihyan and Bam Usaiya who disobeyed
Allah and his Apostle

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 58:
Narrated Jundab bin Sufyan:
In one of the holy Battles a finger of Allah's Apostle (got wounded and)
bled. He said, "You are just a finger that bled, and what you got is in Allah's
Cause."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 59:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "By Him in Whose Hands my soul is! Whoever is
wounded in Allah's Cause....and Allah knows well who gets wounded in His
Cause....will come on the Day of Resurrection with his wound having the
color of blood but the scent of musk."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 60:
Narrated Abdullah bin Abbas:
That Abu Sufyan told him that Heraclius said to him, "I asked you about the
outcome of your battles with him (i.e. the Prophet ) and you told me that
you fought each other with alternate success. So the Apostles are tested in
this way but the ultimate victory is always theirs.
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 61:
Narrated Anas:
My uncle Anas bin An-Nadr was absent from the Battle of Badr. He said, "O
Allah's Apostle! I was absent from the first battle you fought against the
pagans. (By Allah) if Allah gives me a chance to fight the pagans, no doubt.
Allah will see how (bravely) I will fight." On the day of Uhud when the
Muslims turned their backs and fled, he said, "O Allah! I apologize to You for
what these (i.e. his companions) have done, and I denounce what these (i.e.
the pagans) have done." Then he advanced and Sad bin Muadh met him. He
said "O Sad bin Muadh ! By the Lord of An-Nadr, Paradise! I am smelling its
aroma coming from before (the mountain of) Uhud," Later on Sad said, "O
Allah's Apostle! I cannot achieve or do what he (i.e. Anas bin An-Nadr) did.
We found more than eighty wounds by swords and arrows on his body. We
found him dead and his body was mutilated so badly that none except his
sister could recognize him by his fingers." We used to think that the
following Verse was revealed concerning him and other men of his sort:
"Among the believers are men who have been true to their covenant with
Allah.........." (33.23)
His sister Ar-Rubbaya' broke a front tooth of a woman and Allah's Apostle
ordered for retaliation. On that Anas (bin An-Nadr) said, "O Allah's Apostle!
By Him Who has sent you with the Truth, my sister's tooth shall not be
broken." Then the opponents of Anas's sister accepted the compensation
and gave up the claim of retaliation. So Allah's Apostle said, "There are some
people amongst Allah's slaves whose oaths are fulfilled by Allah when they
take them."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 62:
Narrated Kharija bin Zaid:
Zaid bin Thabit said, "When the Quran was compiled from various written
manuscripts, one of the Verses of Surat Al-Ahzab was missing which I used
to hear Allah's Apostle reciting. I could not find it except with Khuzaima bin
Thabjt Al-Ansari, whose witness Allah's Apostle regarded as equal to the
witness of two men. And the Verse was:-- "Among the believers are men
who have been true to what they covenanted with Allah." (33.23)

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 63:
Narrated Al-Bara:
A man whose face was covered with an iron mask (i.e. clad in armor) came
to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall I fight or embrace Islam
first? "The Prophet said, "Embrace Islam first and then fight." So he
embraced Islam, and was martyred. Allah's Apostle said, A Little work, but a
great reward. "(He did very little (after embracing Islam), but he will be
rewarded in abundance)."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 64:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Um Ar-Rubai'bint Al-Bara', the mother of Hartha bin Suraqa came to the
Prophet and said, "O Allah's Prophet! Will you tell me about Hartha?" Hartha
has been killed (i.e. martyred) on the day of Badr with an arrow thrown by
an unidentified person. She added, "If he is in Paradise, I will be patient;
otherwise, I will weep bitterly for him." He said, "O mother of Hartha! There
are Gardens in Paradise and your son got the Firdausal-ala (i.e. the best place
in Paradise)."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 65:
Narrated Abu Musa:
A man came to the Prophet and asked, "A man fights for war booty; another
fights for fame and a third fights for showing off; which of them fights in
Allah's Cause?" The Prophet said, "He who fights that Allah's Word (i.e.
Islam) should be superior, fights in Allah's Cause."
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 66:
Narrated Abu Abs:
(who is 'Abdur-Rahman bin Jabir) Allah's Apostle said," Anyone whose both
feet get covered with dust in Allah's Cause will not be touched by the (Hell)
fire."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 67:
Narrated 'Ikrima:
that Ibn 'Abbas told him and 'Ali bin 'Abdullah to go to Abu Said and listen to
some of his narrations; So they both went (and saw) Abu Said and his
brother irrigating a garden belonging to them. When he saw them, he came
up to them and sat down with his legs drawn up and wrapped in his
garment and said, "(During the construction of the mosque of the Prophet)
we carried the adobe of the mosque, one brick at a time while 'Ammar used
to carry two at a time. The Prophet passed by 'Ammar and removed the dust
off his head and said, "May Allah be merciful to 'Ammar. He will be killed by
a rebellious aggressive group. 'Ammar will invite them to (obey) Allah and
they will invite him to the (Hell) fire."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 68:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When Allah's Apostle returned on the day (of the battle) of Al-Khandaq (i.e.
Trench), he put down his arms and took a bath. Then Gabriel whose head
was covered with dust, came to him saying, "You have put down your arms!
By Allah, I have not put down my arms yet." Allah's Apostle said, "Where (to
go now)?" Gabriel said, "This way," pointing towards the tribe of Bani
Quraiza. So Allah's Apostle went out towards them .

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 69:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
For thirty days Allah's Apostle invoked Allah to curse those who had killed
the companions of Bir-Mauna; he invoked evil upon the tribes of Ral,
Dhakwan, and Usaiya who disobeyed Allah and His Apostle. There was
reveled about those who were killed at Bir-Mauna a Quranic Verse we used
to recite, but it was cancelled later on. The Verse was:
"Inform our people that we have met our Lord. He is pleased with us and He
has made us pleased"

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 70:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
"Some people drank alcohol in the morning of the day (of the battle) of
Uhud and were martyred (on the same day)." Sufyan was asked, "(Were
they martyred) in the last part of the day?)" He replied, "Such information
does not occur in the narration."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 71:
Narrated Jabir:
My father's mutilated body was brought to the Prophet and was placed in
front of him. I went to uncover his face but my companions forbade me.
Then mourning cries of a lady were heard, and it was said that she was
either the daughter or the sister of Amr. The Prophet said, "Why is she
crying?" Or said, "Do not cry, for the angels are still shading him with their
wings." (Al-Bukhari asked Sadqa, a sub-narrator, "Does the narration include
the expression: 'Till he was lifted?' " The latter replied, "Jabir may have said
it.")

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 72:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "Nobody who enters Paradise likes to go back to the
world even if he got everything on the earth, except a Mujahid who wishes
to return to the world so that he may be martyred ten times because of the
dignity he receives (from Allah)."
Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba: Our Prophet told us about the message of
our Lord that "Whoever amongst us is killed will go to Paradise." Umar
asked the Prophet, "Is it not true that our men who are killed will go to
Paradise and their's (i.e. those of the Pagan's) will go to the (Hell) fire?" The
Prophet said, "Yes."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 73:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa:
Allah's Apostle said, "Know that Paradise is under the shades of swords."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 74i:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Once Solomon, son of David said, '(By Allah) Tonight I
will have sexual intercourse with one hundred (or ninety-nine) women each
of whom will give birth to a knight who will fight in Allah's Cause.' On that a
(i.e. if Allah wills) but he did not say, 'Allah willing.' Therefore only one of
those women conceived and gave birth to a half-man. By Him in Whose
Hands Muhammad's life is, if he had said, "Allah willing', (he would have
begotten sons) all of whom would have been knights striving in Allah's
Cause."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 74n:
Narrated Anas: The Prophet was the best, the bravest and the most
generous of all the people. Once when the people of Medina got frightened,
the Prophet rode a horse and went ahead of them and said, "We found this
horse very fast."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 75:
Narrated Muhammad bin Jubair:
Jubair bin Mut'im told me that while he was in the company of Allah's
Apostle with the people returning from Hunain, some people (bedouins)
caught hold of the Prophet and started begging of him so much so that he
had to stand under a (kind of thorny tree (i.e. Samurah) and his cloak was
snatched away. The Prophet stopped and said, "Give me my cloak. If I had as
many camels as these thorny trees, I would have distributed them amongst
you and you will not find me a miser or a liar or a coward."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 76:
Narrated 'Amr bin Maimun Al-Audi:
Sad used to teach his sons the following words as a teacher teaches his
students the skill of writing and used to say that Allah's Apostle used to seek
Refuge with Allah from them (i.e. the evils) at the end of every prayer. The
words are:
'O Allah! I seek refuge with You from cowardice, and seek refuge with You
from being brought back to a bad stage of old life and seek refuge with You
from the afflictions of the world, and seek refuge with You from the
punishments in the grave.'

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 77:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet used to say, "O Allah! I seek refuge with You from helplessness,
laziness, cowardice and feeble old age; I seek refuge with You from
afflictions of life and death and seek refuge with You from the punishment
in the grave."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 78:
Narrated As-Sa'-ib bin Yazid:
I was in the company of Talha bin 'Ubaidullah, Sad, Al-Miqdad bin Al-Aswad
and 'Abdur Rahman bin 'Auf and I heard none of them narrating anything
from Allah's Apostle but Talha was talking about the day (of the battle) of
Uhud.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 79:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
On the day of the Conquest (of Mecca) the Prophet said, "There is no
emigration after the Conquest but Jihad and intentions. When you are called
(by the Muslim ruler) for fighting, go forth immediately." (See Hadith No.
42)

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 80i:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah welcomes two men with a smile; one of whom
kills the other and both of them enter Paradise. One fights in Allah's Cause
and gets killed. Later on Allah forgives the 'killer who also get martyred (In
Allah's Cause)."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 80n:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I went to Allah's Apostle while he was at Khaibar after it had fallen in the
Muslims' hands. I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Give me a share (from the land of
Khaibar)."
One of the sons of Sa'id bin Al-'As said, "O Allah's Apostle! Do not give him a
share." I said, "This is the murderer of Ibn Qauqal." The son of Said bin Al-As
said, "Strange! A Wabr (i.e. guinea pig) who has come down to us from the
mountain of Qaduim (i.e. grazing place of sheep) blames me for killing a
Muslim who was given superiority by Allah because of me, and Allah did not
disgrace me at his hands (i.e. was not killed as an infidel)." (The sub-narrator
said "I do not know whether the Prophet gave him a share or not.")

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 81:
Narrated Anas bin Malik
In the life-time of the Prophet, Abu Talha did not fast because of the Jihad,
but after the Prophet died I never saw him without fasting except on 'Id-ulFitr and 'Id-ul-Aclha.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 82:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Five are regarded as martyrs: They are those who die
because of plague, abdominal disease, drowning or a falling building etc.,
and the martyrs in Allah's Cause."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 83:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "Plauge is the cause of martyrdom of every Muslim (who
dies because of it)."
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 84:
Narrated Al-Bara:
When the Divine Inspiration: "Those of the believers who sit (at home), was
revealed the Prophet sent for Zaid (bin Thabit) who came with a shoulderblade and wrote on it. Ibn Um-Maktum complained about his blindness and
on that the following revelation came: "Not equal are those believers who
sit (at home) except those who are disabled (by injury, or are blind or lame
etc.) and those who strive hard and fight in the Way of Allah with their
wealth and lives)." (4.95)

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 85:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi:
I saw Marwan bin Al-Hakam sitting in the Mosque. So I came forward and
sat by his side. He told us that Zaid bin Thabit had told him that Allah's
Apostle had dictated to him the Divine Verse:
"Not equal are those believers who sit (at home) and those who strive hard
and fight in the Cause of Allah with their wealth and lives.' (4.95)
Zaid said, "Ibn-Maktum came to the Prophet while he was dictating to me
that very Verse. On that Ibn Um Maktum said, "O Allah's Apostle! If I had
power, I would surely take part in Jihad." He was a blind man. So Allah sent
down revelation to His Apostle while his thigh was on mine and it became so
heavy for me that I feared that my thigh would be broken. Then that state of
the Prophet was over after Allah revealed "...except those who are disabled
(by injury or are blind or lame etc.) (4.95)

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 86:
Narrated Salim Abu-An-Nadr:
'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa wrote and I read what he wrote that Allah's Apostle
said, "When you face them ( i.e. your enemy) then be patient."
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 87:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle went towards the Khandaq (i.e. Trench) and saw the
Emigrants and the Ansar digging in a very cold morning as they did not have
slaves to do that for them. When he noticed their fatigue and hunger he
said, "O Allah! The real life is that of the Here-after, (so please) forgive the
Ansar and the Emigrants." In its reply the Emigrants and the Ansar said, "We
are those who have given a pledge of allegiance to Muhammad that we will
carry on Jihad as long as we live."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 88:
Narrated Anas:
The Emigrants and the Ansar started digging the trench around Medina
carrying the earth on their backs and saying, "We are those who have given
a pledge of allegiance to Muhammad that we will I carry on Jihad as long as
we live." The Prophet kept on replying, "O Allah, there is no good except the
good of the Hereafter; so confer Your Blessings on the Ansar and the
Emigrants."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 89:
Narrated Al-Bara:
The Prophet went on carrying (i.e. the earth) and saying, "Without You (O
Allah!) we would have got no guidance."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 90:
Narrated Al-Bara:
On the day (of the battle) of Al-Ahzab (i.e. clans) I saw the Prophet carrying
earth, and the earth was covering the whiteness of his abdomen. And he
was saying, "Without You (O Allah!) we would have got no guidance, nor
given in charity, nor prayed. So please bless us with tranquility and make
firm our feet when we meet our enemies.
Indeed (these) people have rebelled against (oppressed) us but never shall
we yield if they try to bring affliction upon us."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 91:
Narrated Anas:
We returned from the Ghazwa of Tabuk along with the Prophet. (See Hadith
No. 92 below) .

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 92:
Narrated Anas:
While the Prophet was in a Ghazwa he said, "Some people have remained
behind us in Medina and we never crossed a mountain path or a valley, but
they were with us (i.e. sharing the reward with us), as they have been held
back by a (legal) excuse. "

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 93:
Narrated Abu Said:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Indeed, anyone who fasts for one day for
Allah's Pleasure, Allah will keep his face away from the (Hell) fire for (a
distance covered by a journey of) seventy years."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 94:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Whoever spends two things in Allah's Cause, will be
called by all the gate-keepers of Paradise who will be saying, 'O so-and-so!
Come here.' " Abu Bakr said, "O Allah's Apostle! Such persons will never be
destroyed." The Prophet said, "I hope you will be one of them."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 95:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle ascended the pulpit and said, "Nothing worries me as to
what will happen to you after me, except the temptation of worldly
blessings which will be conferred on you." Then he mentioned the worldly
pleasures. He started with the one (i.e. the blessings) and took up the other
(i.e. the pleasures). A man got up saying, "O Allah's Apostle! Can the good
bring about evil?" The Prophet remained silent and we thought that he was
being inspired divinely, so all the people kept silent with awe. Then the
Prophet wiped the sweat off his face and asked, "Where is the present
questioner?" "Do you think wealth is good?" he repeated thrice, adding, "No
doubt, good produces nothing but good. Indeed it is like what grows on the
banks of a stream which either kills or nearly kills the grazing animals
because of gluttony except the vegetation-eating animal which eats till both
its flanks are full (i.e. till it gets satisfied) and then stands in the sun and
defecates and urinates and again starts grazing. This worldly property is
sweet vegetation. How excellent the wealth of the Muslim is, if it is
collected through legal means and is spent in Allah's Cause and on orphans,
poor people and travelers. But he who does not take it legally is like an eater
who is never satisfied and his wealth will be a witness against him on the
Day of Resurrection."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 96:
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid:
Allah's Apostle said, " He who pre pares a Ghazi going in Allah's Cause is
given a reward equal to that of) a Ghazi; and he who looks after properly the
dependents of a Ghazi going in Allah's Cause is (given a reward equal to that
of) Ghazi."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 97:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet used not to enter any house in Medina except the house of Um
Sulaim besides those of his wives when he was asked why, he said, "I take
pity on her as her brother was killed in my company. "

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 98:
Narrated Ibn Aun:
Once Musa bin Anas while describing the battle of Yamama, said, "Anas bin
Malik went to Thabit bin Qais, who had lifted his clothes from his thighs and
was applying Hunut to his body. Anas asked, 'O Uncle! What is holding you
back (from the battle)?' He replied, 'O my nephew! I am coming just now,'
and went on perfuming himself with Hunut, then he came and sat (in the
row). Anas then mentioned that the people fled from the battle-field. On
that Thabit said, 'Clear the way for me to fight the enemy. We would never
do so (i.e. flee) in the company of Allah's Apostle. How bad the habits you
have acquired from your enemies!"

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 99:
Narrated Jabir:
The Prophet said, "Who will bring me the information about the enemy on
the day (of the battle) of Al-Ahzab (i.e. Clans)?" Az-Zubair said, "I will." The
Prophet said again, "Who will bring me the information about the enemy?"
Az-Zubair said again, "I will." The Prophet said, "Every prophet had a disciple
and my disciple is Az-Zubair. "

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 100:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
When the Prophet called the people (Sadqa, a sub-narrator, said, 'Most
probably that happened on the day of Al-Khandaq) Az-Zubair responded to
the call (i.e. to act as a reconnoiter). The Prophet) called the people again
and Az-Zubair responded to the call. The Prophet then said, "Every prophet
had a disciple and my disciple is Zubair bin Al-'Awwam."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 101:
Narrated Malik bin Al-Huwairith:
On my departure from the Prophet he said to me and to a friend of mine,
"You two, pronounce the Adhan and the Iqama for the prayer and let the
elder of you lead the prayer."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 102:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Good will remain (as a permanent quality) in the
foreheads of horses till the Day of Resurrection."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 103:
Narrated Ursa bin ALGA:
The Prophet said, "Good will remain (as a permanent quality) in the
foreheads of horses till the Day of Resurrection."
And narrated Anas bin Malik: Allah's Apostle said, "There is a blessing in the
fore-heads of horses."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 104:
Narrated 'Urwa Al-Bariqi:
The Prophet said, "Good will remain (as a permanent quality) in the
foreheads of horses (for Jihad) till the Day of Resurrection, for they bring
about either a reward (in the Hereafter) or booty (in this world."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 105:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "If somebody keeps a horse in Allah's Cause motivated by
his faith in Allah and his belief in His Promise, then he will be rewarded on
the Day of Resurrection for what the horse has eaten or drunk and for its
dung and urine."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 106:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:
(from his father) Abu Qatada went out (on a journey) with Allah's Apostle
but he was left behind with some of his companions who were in the state
of Ihram. He himself was not in the state of Ihram. They saw an opener
before he could see it. When they saw the opener, they did not speak
anything till Abu Qatada saw it. So, he rode over his horse called Al-Jarada
and requested them to give him his lash, but they refused. So, he himself
took it and then attacked the opener and slaughtered it. He ate of its meat
and his companions ate, too, but they regretted their eating. When they met
the Prophet (they asked him about it) and he asked, "Have you some of its
meat (left) with you?" Abu Qatada replied, "Yes, we have its leg with us." So,
the Prophet took and ate it.
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 107:
Narrated Sahl:
In our garden there was a horse belonging to the Prophet called Al-Luhaif or
Al-Lakhif.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 108:
Narrated Mu'adh:
I was a companion rider of the Prophet on a donkey called 'Ufair. The
Prophet asked, "O Mu'adh! Do you know what Allah's right on His slaves is,
and what the right of His slaves on Him is?" I replied, "Allah and His Apostle
know better." He said, "Allah's right on His slaves is that they should
worship Him (Alone) and should not worship any besides Him. And slave's
right on Allah is that He should not punish him who worships none besides
Him." I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Should I not inform the people of this good
news?" He said, "Do not inform them of it, lest they should depend on it
(absolutely)."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 109:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Once there was a feeling of fright in Medina, so the Prophet borrowed a
horse belonging to us called Mandub (and he rode away on it). (When the
Prophet returned) he said, "I have not seen anything of fright and I found it
(i.e. this horse) very fast."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 110:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
I heard the Prophet saying. "Evil omen is in three things: The horse, the
woman and the house."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 111:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad Saidi:
Allah's Apostle said "If there is any evil omen in anything, then it is in the
woman, the horse and the house."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 112:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, " Horses are kept for one of three purposes; for some
people they are a source of reward, for some others they are a means of
shelter and for some others they are a source of sins. The one for whom
they are a source of reward, is he who keeps a horse for Allah's Cause (i.e.
Jihad) tying it with a long tether on a meadow or in a garden with the result
that whatever it eats from the area of the meadow or the garden where it is
tied will be counted as good deeds for his benefit, and if it should break its
rope and jump over one or two hillocks then all its dung and its foot marks
will be written as good deeds for him; and if it passes by a river and drinks
water from it even though he had no intention of watering it, even then he
will get the reward for its drinking. As for the man for whom horses are a
source of sins, he is the one who keeps a horse for the sake of pride and
pretense and showing enmity for Muslims: such a horse will be a source of
sins for him. When Allah's Apostle was asked about donkeys, he replied,
"Nothing has been revealed to me about them except this unique,
comprehensive Verse: "Then anyone who does an atom's (or a small ant's)
weight of good shall see it; And anyone who does an atom's (or a small
ant's) weight of evil, shall see it.' (101.7-8)

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 113:
Narrated Muslim from Abu Aqil from Abu Al-Mutawakkil An-Naji:
I called on Jabir bin 'Abdullah Al-Ansari and said to him, "Relate to me what
you have heard from Allah's Apostle ." He said, "I accompanied him on one
of the journeys." (Abu Aqil said, "I do not know whether that journey was
for the purpose of Jihad or 'Umra.") "When we were returning," Jabir
continued, "the Prophet said, 'Whoever wants to return earlier to his family,
should hurry up.' We set off and I was on a black red tainted camel having
no defect, and the people were behind me. While I was in that state the
camel stopped suddenly (because of exhaustion). On that the Prophet said
to me, 'O Jabir, wait!' Then he hit it once with his lash and it started moving
on a fast pace. He then said, 'Will you sell the camel?' I replied in the
affirmative when we reached Medina, and the Prophet went to the Mosque
along with his companions. I, too, went to him after tying the camel on the
pavement at the Mosque gate. Then I said to him, 'This is your camel.' He
came out and started examining the camel and saying, 'The camel is ours.'
Then the Prophet sent some Awaq (i.e. an amount) of gold saying, 'Give it to
Jabir.' Then he asked, 'Have you taken the full price (of the camel)?' I replied
in the affirmative. He said, 'Both the price and the camel are for you.' ''

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 114:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
There was a feeling of fright in Medina, so the Prophet borrowed a horse
called Mandub belonging 'to Abu Talha and mounted it. (On his return), he
said, "I did not see anything of fright and I found this horse very fast."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 115:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle fixed two shares for the horse and one share for its rider
(from the war booty).
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 116:
Narrated Abu Ishaq:
Somebody asked Al-Bar-a bin 'Azib, "Did you flee deserting Allah's Apostle
during the battle of Hunain?" Al-Bara replied, "But Allah's Apostle did not
flee. The people of the Tribe of Hawazin were good archers. When we met
them, we attacked them, and they fled. When the Muslims started collecting
the war booty, the pagans faced us with arrows, but Allah's Apostle did not
flee. No doubt, I saw him on his white mule and Abu Sufyan was holding its
reins and the Prophet was saying, 'I am the Prophet in truth: I am the son of
'Abdul Muttalib.' "

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 117:
Narrated Ibn'Umar:
When the Prophet put his feet in the stirrup and the she-camel got up
carrying him he would start reciting Talbiya at the mosque of Dhul-Hulaifa.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 118:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet met them (i.e. the people) while he was riding an unsaddled
horse with his sword slung over his shoulder.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 119:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Once the people of Medina were frightened, so the Prophet rode a horse
belonging to Abu Talha and it ran slowly, or was of narrow paces. When he
returned, he said, "I found your (i.e. Abu Talha's) horse very fast. After that
the horse could not be surpassed in running..'
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 120:
Narrated ('Abdullah) bin 'Umar:
The Prophet arranged for a horse race amongst the horses that had been
made lean to take place between Al-Hafya'' and Thaniyat Al-Wada' (i.e.
names of two places) and the horses which had not been mad.? lean from
Ath-Thaniyat to the mosque of Bani Zuraiq. I was also amongst those who
took part in that horse race. Sufyan, a sub-narrator, said, "The distance
between Al-Hafya and Thaniya Al-Wada' is five or six miles; and between
Thaniya and the mosque of Bani Zuraiq is one mile."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 121:
Narrated Abdullah:
The Prophet arranged for a horse race of the horses which had not been
made lean; the area of the race was from Ath-Thaniya to the mosque of Bani
Zuraiq. (The sub-narrator said, "'Abdullah bin 'Umar was amongst those
who participated in that horse race.").

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 122:
Narrated Abu Ishaq from Musa bin 'Uqba from Mafia from Ibn 'Umar who
said:
"Allah's Apostle arranged a horse race amongst the horses that had been
made lean, letting them start from Al-Hafya' and their limit (distance of
running) was up to Thaniyat-al-Wada'. I asked Musa, 'What was the distance
between the two places?' Musa replied, 'Six or seven miles. He arranged a
race of the horses which had not been made lean sending them from
Thaniyat-al-Wada', and their limit was up to the mosque of Bani Zuraiq.' I
asked, 'What was the distance between those two places?' He replied 'One
mile or so.' Ibn 'Umar was amongst those who participated in that horse
race."
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 123:
Narrated Anas:
The she camel of the Prophet was called Al-Adba.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 124:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet had a she camel called Al Adba which could not be excelled in a
race. (Humaid, a sub-narrator said, "Or could hardly be excelled.") Once a
bedouin came riding a camel below six years of age which surpasses it (i.e.
Al'Adba) in the race. The Muslims felt it so much that the Prophet noticed
their distress. He then said, "It is Allah's Law that He brings down whatever
rises high in the world."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 125:
Narrated 'Amr bin Al-Harith:
The Prophet did not leave anything behind him after his death except a
white mule, his arms and a piece of land which he left to be given in charity.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 126:
Narrated Al-Bara:
that a man asked him. "O Abu 'Umara! Did you flee on the day (of the battle)
of Hunain?" He replied, "No, by Allah, the Prophet did not flee but the hasty
people fled and the people of the Tribe of Hawazin attacked them with
arrows, while the Prophet was riding his white mule and Abu Sufyan bin AlHarith was holding its reins, and the Prophet was saying, 'I am the Prophet
in truth, I am the son of 'Abdul Muttalib.' "
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 127:
Narrated 'Aisha:
the mother of the faithful believers, I requested the Prophet permit me to
participate in Jihad, but he said, "Your Jihad is the performance of Hajj."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 128:
Narrated 'Aisha:
the mother of the faithful believers: The Prophet was asked by his wives
about the Jihad and he replied, "The best Jihad (for you) is (the
performance of) Hajj."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 129:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle went to the daughter of Milhan and reclined there (and
slept) and then (woke up) smiling. She asked, "O Allah's Apostle! What
makes you smile?" He replied, (I dreamt that) some people amongst my
followers were sailing on the green sea in Allah's Cause, resembling kings on
thrones." She said, "O Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah to make me one of
them." He said, "O Allah! Let her be one of them." Then he (slept again and
woke up and) smiled. She asked him the same question and he gave the
same reply. She said, "Invoke Allah to make me one of them." He replied,
''You will be amongst the first group of them; you will not be amongst the
last." Later on she married 'Ubada bin As-Samit and then she sailed on the
sea with bint Qaraza, Mu'awiya's wife (for Jihad). On her return, she
mounted her riding animal, which threw her down breaking her neck, and
she died on falling down.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 130:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Whenever the Prophet intended to proceed on a journey, he used to draw
lots amongst his wives and would take the one upon whom the lot fell.
Once, before setting out for Jihad, he drew lots amongst us and the lot
came to me; so I went with the Prophet; and that happened after the
revelation of the Verse Hijab (i.e. veiling).

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 131:
Narrated Anas:
On the day (of the battle) of Uhad when (some) people retreated and left
the Prophet, I saw 'Aisha bint Abu Bakr and Um Sulaim, with their robes
tucked up so that the bangles around their ankles were visible hurrying with
their water skins (in another narration it is said, "carrying the water skins on
their backs"). Then they would pour the water in the mouths of the people,
and return to fill the water skins again and came back again to pour water in
the mouths of the people.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 132:
Narrated Tha'laba bin Abi Malik:
'Umar bin Al-Khattab distributed some garments amongst the women of
Medina. One good garment remained, and one of those present with him
said, "O chief of the believers! Give this garment to your wife, the (grand)
daughter of Allah's Apostle." They meant Um Kulthum, the daughter of 'Ali.
'Umar said, Um Salit has more right (to have it)." Um Salit was amongst
those Ansari women who had given the pledge of allegiance to Allah's
Apostle.' 'Umar said, "She (i.e. Um Salit) used to carry the water skins for us
on the day of Uhud."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 133:
Narrated Ar-Rubayyi 'bint Mu'auwidh:
We were in the company of the Prophet providing the wounded with water
and treating them and bringing the killed to Medina (from the battle field) .

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 134:
Narrated Ar-Rabi'bint Mu'auwidh:
We used to take part in holy battles with the Prophet by providing the
people with water and serving them and bringing the killed and the
wounded back to Medina.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 135:
Narrated Abu Musa:
Abu 'Amir was hit with an arrow in his knee, so I went to him and he asked
me to remove the arrow. When I removed it, the water started dribbling
from it. Then I went to the Prophet and told him about it. He said, "O Allah!
Forgive 'Ubaid Abu 'Amir."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 136:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet was vigilant one night and when he reached Medina, he said,
"Would that a pious man from my companions guard me tonight!" Suddenly
we heard the clatter of arms. He said, "Who is that? " He (The new comer)
replied, " I am Sad bin Abi Waqqas and have come to guard you." So, the
Prophet slept (that night).

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 137:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Let the slave of Dinar and Dirham of Quantify and
Khamisa (i.e. money and luxurious clothes) perish for he is pleased if these
things are given to him, and if not, he is displeased!"
Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet said, " Let the slave of Dinar and Dirham,
of Quantify and Khamisa perish as he is pleased if these things are given to
him, and if not, he is displeased. Let such a person perish and relapse, and if
he is pierced with a thorn, let him not find anyone to take it out for him.
Paradise is for him who holds the reins of his horse to strive in Allah's Cause,
with his hair unkempt and feet covered with dust: if he is appointed in the
vanguard, he is perfectly satisfied with his post of guarding, and if he is
appointed in the rearward, he accepts his post with satisfaction; (he is so
simple and unambiguous that) if he asks for permission he is not permitted,
and if he intercedes, his intercession is not accepted."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 138:
Narrated Anas:
I was in the company of Jabir bin 'Abdullah on a journey and he used to
serve me though he was older than I. Jarir said, "I saw the Ansar doing a
thing (i.e. showing great reverence to the Prophet ) for which I have vowed
that whenever I meet any of them, I will serve him."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 139:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
I went along with the Prophet to Khaibar so as to serve him. (Later on)
when the Prophet returned he, on seeing the Uhud mountain, said, "This is a
mountain that loves us andis loved by us." Then he pointed to Medina with
his hand saying, "O Allah! I make the area which is in between Medina's two
mountains a sanctuary, as Abraham made Mecca a sanctuary. O Allah! Bless
us in our Sa and Mudd (i.e. units of measuring)."
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 140:
Narrated Anas:
We were with the Prophet (on a journey) and the only shade one could have
was the shade made by one's own garment. Those who fasted did not do
any work and those who did not fast served the camels and brought the
water on them and treated the sick and (wounded). So, the Prophet said,
"Today, those who were not fasting took (all) the reward."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 141:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Charity is obligatory everyday on every joint of a human
being. If one helps a person in matters concerning his riding animal by
helping him to ride it or by lifting his luggage on to it, all this will be regarded
charity. A good word, and every step one takes to offer the compulsory
Congregational prayer, is regarded as charity; and guiding somebody on the
road is regarded as charity."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 142:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'di :
Allah's Apostle said, "To guard Muslims from infidels in Allah's Cause for one
day is better than the world and whatever is on its surface, and a place in
Paradise as small as that occupied by the whip of one of you is better than
the world and whatever is on its surface; and a morning's or an evening's
journey which a slave (person) travels in Allah's Cause is better than the
world and whatever is on its surface."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 143:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said to Abu Talha, "Choose one of your boy servants to serve
me in my expedition to Khaibar." So, Abu Talha took me letting me ride
behind him while I was a boy nearing the age of puberty. I used to serve
Allah's Apostle when he stopped to rest. I heard him saying repeatedly, "O
Allah! I seek refuge with You from distress and sorrow, from helplessness
and laziness, from miserliness and cowardice, from being heavily in debt and
from being overcome by men." Then we reached Khaibar; and when Allah
enabled him to conquer the Fort (of Khaibar), the beauty of Safiya bint
Huyai bin Akhtab was described to him. Her husband had been killed while
she was a bride. So Allah's Apostle selected her for himself and took her
along with him till we reached a place called Sad-AsSahba,' where her
menses were over and he took her for his wife. Haris (a kind of dish) was
served on a small leather sheet. Then Allah's Apostle told me to call those
who were around me. So, that was the marriage banquet of Allah's Apostle
and Safiya. Then we left for Medina. I saw Allah's Apostle folding a cloak
round the hump of the camel so as to make a wide space for Safiya (to sit on
behind him) He sat beside his camel letting his knees for Safiya to put her
feet on so as to mount the camel. Then, we proceeded till we approached
Medina; he looked at Uhud (mountain) and said, "This is a mountain which
loves us and is loved by us." Then he looked at Medina and said, "O Allah! I
make the area between its (i.e. Medina's) two mountains a sanctuary as
Abraham made Mecca a sanctuary. O Allah! Bless them (i.e. the people of
Medina) in their Mudd and Sa (i.e. measures)."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 144:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Um Haram told me that the Prophet one day took a midday nap in her
house. Then he woke up smiling. Um Haram asked, "O Allah's Apostle! What
makes you smile?" He replied "I was astonished to see (in my dream) some
people amongst my followers on a sea-voyage looking like kings on the
thrones." She said, "O Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah to make me one of
them." He replied, "You are amongst them." He slept again and then woke
up smiling and said the same as before twice or thrice. And she said, "O
Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah to make me one of them." And he said, "You
are amongst the first batch." 'Ubada bin As-Samit married her (i.e. Um
Haram) and then he took her for Jihad. When she returned, an animal was
presented to her to ride, but she fell down and her neck was broken.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 145:
Narrated Mus'ab bin Sad:
Once Sad (bin Abi Waqqas) thought that he was superior to those who were
below him in rank. On that the Prophet said, "You gain no victory or
livelihood except through (the blessings and invocations of) the poor
amongst you."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 146:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri
The Prophet said, "A time will come when groups of people will go for Jihad
and it will be asked, 'Is there anyone amongst you who has enjoyed the
company of the Prophet?' The answer will be, 'Yes.' Then they will be given
victory (by Allah) (because of him). Then a time will come when it will be
asked. 'Is there anyone amongst you who has enjoyed the company of the
companions of the Prophet?' It will be said, 'Yes,' and they will be given
victory (by Allah). Then a time will come when it will be said. 'Is there anyone
amongst you who has enjoyed the company of the companions of the
companions of the Prophet?' It will be said, 'Yes,' and they will be given
victory (by Allah)."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 147:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi:
Allah's Apostle and the pagans faced each other and started fighting. When
Allah's Apostle returned to his camp and when the pagans returned to their
camp, somebody talked about a man amongst the companions of Allah's
Apostle who would follow and kill with his sword any pagan going alone. He
said, "Nobody did his job (i.e. fighting) so properly today as that man."
Allah's Apostle said, "Indeed, he is amongst the people of the (Hell) Fire." A
man amongst the people said, "I shall accompany him (to watch what he
does)" Thus he accompanied him, and wherever he stood, he would stand
with him, and wherever he ran, he would run with him.
Then the (brave) man got wounded seriously and he decided to bring about
his death quickly. He planted the blade of the sword in the ground directing
its sharp end towards his chest between his two breasts. Then he leaned on
the sword and killed himself. The other man came to Allah's Apostle and
said, "I testify that you are Allah's Apostle." The Prophet asked, "What has
happened?" He replied, "(It is about) the man whom you had described as
one of the people of the (Hell) Fire. The people were greatly surprised at
what you said, and I said, 'I will find out his reality for you.' So, I came out
seeking him. He got severely wounded, and hastened to die by slanting the
blade of his sword in the ground directing its sharp end towards his chest
between his two breasts. Then he eased on his sword and killed himself."
when Allah's Apostle said, "A man may seem to the people as if he were
practising the deeds of the people of Paradise while in fact he is from the
people of the Hell) Fire, another may seem to the people as if he were
practicing the deeds of the people of Hell (Fire), while in fact he is from the
people of Paradise."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 148:
Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa:
The Prophet passed by some people of the tribe of Bani Aslam who were
practicing archery. The Prophet said, "O Bani Ismail ! Practice archery as your
father Isma'il was a great archer. Keep on throwing arrows and I am with
Bani so-and-so." So one of the parties ceased throwing. Allah's Apostle said,
"Why do you not throw?" They replied, "How should we throw while you are
with them (i.e. on their side)?" On that the Prophet said, "Throw, and I am
with all of you."
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 149:
Narrated Abu Usaid:
On the day (of the battle) of Badr when we stood in rows against (the army
of) Quraish and they stood in rows against us, the Prophet said, "When they
do come near you, throw arrows at them."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 150:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
While some Ethiopians were playing in the presence of the Prophet, 'Umar
came in, picked up a stone and hit them with it. On that the Prophet said, "O
'Umar! Allow them (to play)." Ma'mar (the sub-narrator) added that they
were playing in the Mosque.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 151:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Abu Talha and the Prophet used to shield themselves with one shield. Abu
Talha was a good archer, and when he threw (his arrows) the Prophet
would look at the target of his arrows.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 152:
Narrated Sahl:
When the helmet of the Prophet was smashed on his head and blood
covered his face and one of his front teeth got broken, 'Ali brought the
water in his shield and Fatima the Prophet's daughter) washed him. But
when she saw that the bleeding increased more by the water, she took a
mat, burnt it, and placed the ashes on the wound of the Prophet and so the
blood stopped oozing out
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 153:
Narrated 'Umar:
The properties of Bani An-Nadir which Allah had transferred to His Apostle
as Fai Booty were not gained by the Muslims with their horses and camels.
The properties therefore, belonged especially to Allah's Apostle who used
to give his family their yearly expenditure and spend what remained thereof
on arms and horses to be used in Allah's Cause.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 154:
Narrated Ali:
I never saw the Prophet saying, "Let my parents sacrifice their lives for you,"
to any man after Sad. I heard him saying (to him), "Throw (the arrows)! Let
my parents sacrifice their lives for you."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 155:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle came to my house while two girls were singing beside me
the songs of Bu'ath (a story about the war between the two tribes of the
Ansar, i.e. Khazraj and Aus, before Islam.) The Prophet reclined on the bed
and turned his face to the other side. Abu Bakr came and scolded me and
said protestingly, "Instrument of Satan in the presence of Allah's Apostle?"
Allah's Apostle turned his face towards him and said, "Leave them." When
Abu Bakr became inattentive, I waved the two girls to go away and they left.
It was the day of 'Id when negroes used to play with leather shields and
spears. Either I requested Allah's Apostle or he himself asked me whether I
would like to see the display. I replied in the affirmative. Then he let me
stand behind him and my cheek was touching his cheek and he was saying,
"Carry on, O Bani Arfida (i.e. negroes)!" When I got tired, he asked me if that
was enough. I replied in the affirmative and he told me to leave.
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 156:
Narrated Anas:
The 'Prophet was the best and the bravest amongst the people. Once the
people of Medina got terrified at night, so they went in the direction of the
noise (that terrified them). The Prophet met them (on his way back) after he
had found out the truth. He was riding an unsaddled horse belonging to Abu
Talha and a sword was hanging by his neck, and he was saying, "Don't be
afraid! Don't be afraid!" He further said, "I found it (i.e. the horse) very fast,"
or said, "This horse is very fast." (Qastala-ni)

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 157:
Narrated Abu Umama:
Some people conquered many countries and their swords were decorated
neither with gold nor silver, but they were decorated with leather, lead and
iron.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 158:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
That he proceeded in the company of Allah's Apostle towards Najd to
participate in a Ghazwa. (Holy-battle) When Allah's Apostle returned, he too
returned with him. Midday came upon them while they were in a valley
having many thorny trees. Allah's Apostle and the people dismounted and
dispersed to rest in the shade of the trees. Allah's Apostle rested under a
tree and hung his sword on it. We all took a nap and suddenly we heard
Allah's Apostle calling us. (We woke up) to see a bedouin with him. The
Prophet said, "This bedouin took out my sword while I was sleeping and
when I woke up, I found the unsheathed sword in his hand and he
challenged me saying, 'Who will save you from me?' I said thrice, 'Allah.' The
Prophet did not punish him but sat down.
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 159:
Narrated Sahl:
That he was asked about the wound of the Prophet on the day (of the
battle) of Uhud. He said, "The face of the Prophet as wounded and one of
his front teeth as broken and the helmet over his head was smashed. Fatima
washed of the blood while Ali held water. When she saw that bleeding was
increasing continuously, she burnt a mat (of date-palm leaves) till it turned
into ashes which she put over the wound and thus the bleeding ceased."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 160:
Narrated 'Amr bin Al-Harith:
The Prophet did not leave behind him after his death, anything except his
arms, his white mule, and a piece of land at Khaibar which he left to be given
in charity .

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 161:
Narrated Jabir:
as above (Hadith No. 158).

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 162:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
That he participated in a Ghazwa (Holy-Battle) in the company of Allah's
Apostle. Midday came upon them while they were in a valley having many
thorny trees. The people dispersed to rest in the shade of the trees. The
Prophet rested under a tree, hung his sword on it, and then slept. Then he
woke up to find near to him, a man whose presence he had not noticed
before. The Prophet said, "This (man) took my sword (out of its scabbard
and said, 'Who will save you from me.' I replied, 'Allah.' So, he put the sword
back into its scabbard, and you see him sitting here." Anyhow, the Prophet
did not punish him. (See Hadith No. 158)

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 163:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
That he was in the company of Allah's Apostle and when they had covered a
portion of the road to Mecca, he and some of the companions lagged
behind. The latter were in a state of Ihram, while he was not. He saw an
onager and rode his horse and requested his companions to give him his
lash but they refused. Then he asked them to give him his spear but they
refused, so he took it himself, attacked the onager, and killed it. Some of the
companions of the Prophet ate of it while some others refused to eat. When
they caught up with Allah's Apostle they asked him about that, and he said,
"That was a meal Allah fed you with." (It is also said that Allah's Apostle
asked, "Have you got something of its meat?")

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 164:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet , while in a tent (on the day of the battle of Badr) said, "O Allah!
I ask you the fulfillment of Your Covenant and Promise. O Allah! If You wish
(to destroy the believers) You will never be worshipped after today." Abu
Bakr caught him by the hand and said, "This is sufficient, O Allah's Apostle!
You have asked Allah pressingly." The Prophet was clad in his armor at that
time. He went out, saying to me: "There multitude will be put to flight and
they will show their backs. Nay, but the Hour is their appointed time (for
their full recompense) and that Hour will be more grievous and more bitter
(than their worldly failure)." (54.45-46) Khalid said that was on the day of
the battle of Badr.
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 165:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle died while his (iron) armor was mortgaged to a Jew for thirty
Sas of barley.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 166:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The example of a miser and the one who gives in charity,
is like the example of two men wearing iron cloaks so tightly that their arms
are raised forcibly towards their collar-bones. So, whenever a charitable
person wants to give in charity, his cloak spreads over his body so much so
that it wipes out his traces, but whenever the miser wants to give in charity,
the rings (of the iron cloak) come closer to each other and press over his
body, and his hands gets connected to his collar-bones. Abu Huraira heard
the Prophet saying. "The miser then tries to widen it but in vain."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 167:
Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba:
Allah's Apostle went out to answer the call of nature and on his return I
brought some water to him. He performed the ablution while he was
wearing a Sha'mi cloak. He rinsed his mouth and washed his nose by putting
water in it and then blowing it out, and washed his face. Then he tried to
take out his hands through his sleeves but they were tight, so he took them
out from underneath, washed them and passed wet hands over his head
and over his leather socks.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 168:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet allowed 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf and Az-Zubair to wear silken
shirts because they had a skin disease causing itching.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 169:
Narrated Anas:
as above.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 170:
Narrated Anas:
Abdur Rahman bin 'Auf and Az-Zubair complained to the Prophet, i.e. about
the lice (that caused itching) so he allowed them to wear silken clothes. I
saw them wearing such clothes in a holy battle.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 171:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet allowed 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf and Az-Zubair bin Al-'Awwam
to wear silk.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 172:
Narrated Anas:
(Wearing of silk) was allowed to them (i.e. 'AbdurRahman and Az-Zubair)
because of the itching they suffered from.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 173:
Narrated Umaiya Ad-Damri:
I saw the Prophet eating of a shoulder (of a sheep) by cutting from it and
then he was called to prayer and he prayed without repeating his ablution.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 174:
Narrated Az-Zuhri:
as above (Hadith No. 173...) and added that the Prophet put the knife down.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 175:
Narrated Khalid bin Madan:
That 'Umair bin Al-Aswad Al-Anasi told him that he went to 'Ubada bin AsSamit while he was staying in his house at the sea-shore of Hims with (his
wife) Um Haram. 'Umair said. Um Haram informed us that she heard the
Prophet saying, "Paradise is granted to the first batch of my followers who
will undertake a naval expedition." Um Haram added, I said, 'O Allah's
Apostle! Will I be amongst them?' He replied, 'You are amongst them.' The
Prophet then said, 'The first army amongst' my followers who will invade
Caesar's City will be forgiven their sins.' I asked, 'Will I be one of them, O
Allah's Apostle?' He replied in the negative."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 176:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "You (i.e. Muslims) will fight wi the Jews till some of
them will hide behind stones. The stones will (betray them) saying, 'O
'Abdullah (i.e. slave of Allah)! There is a Jew hiding behind me; so kill him.' "

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 177:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The Hour will not be established until you fight with
the Jews, and the stone behind which a Jew will be hiding will say. "O
Muslim! There is a Jew hiding behind me, so kill him."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 178:
Narrated 'Amr bin Taghlib:
The Prophet said, "One of the portents of the Hour is that you will fight with
people wearing shoes made of hair; and one of the portents of the Hour is
that you will fight with broad-faced people whose faces will look like shields
coated with leather."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 179:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The Hour will not be established until you fight with
the Turks; people with small eyes, red faces, and flat noses. Their faces will
look like shields coated with leather. The Hour will not be established till you
fight with people whose shoes are made of hair."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 180:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The Hour will not be established till you fight with people
wearing shoes made of hair. And the Hour will not be established till you
fight with people whose faces look like shields coated with leather. " (Abu
Huraira added, "They will be) small-eyed, flat nosed, and their faces will look
like shields coated with leather.")

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 181:
Narrated Abu Ishaq
A man asked Al-Bara', "O Abu 'Umara! Did you all flee on the day (of the
battle) of Hunain?" He replied, "No, by Allah! Allah's Apostle did not flee, but
his young unarmed companions passed by the archers of the tribe of
Hawazin and Bani Nasr whose arrows hardly missed a target, and they
threw arrows at them hardly missing a shot. So the Muslims retreated
towards the Prophet while he was riding his white mule which was being led
by his cousin Abu Sufyan bin Al-Harith bin 'Abdul Muttalib. The Prophet
dismounted and invoked Allah for victory; then he said, 'I am the Prophet,
without a lie; I am the son of 'Abdul Muttalib, and then he arranged his
companions in rows."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 182:
Narrated 'Ali:
When it was the day of the battle of Al-Ahzab (i.e. the clans), Allah's Apostle
said, "O Allah! Fill their (i.e. the infidels') houses and graves with fire as they
busied us so much that we did not perform the prayer (i.e. 'Asr) till the sun
set."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 183:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet used to recite the following invocations during Qunut: "O Allah!
Save Salama bin Hisham. O Allah! Save Al-Walid bin Al-Walid. O Allah! Save
'Aiyash bin Rabi'a O Allah ! Save the weak Muslims. O Allah! Be very hard on
Mudar tribe. O Allah! Afflict them with years (of famine) similar to the
(famine) years of the time of Prophet Joseph."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 184:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa:
Allah's Apostle invoked evil upon the pagans on the ay (of the battle) of AlAhzab, saying, "O Allah! The Revealer of the Holy Book, the Swift-Taker of
Accounts, O Allah, defeat Al-Ahzab (i.e. the clans), O Allah, defeat them and
shake them."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 185:
Narrated Abdullah:
Once the Prophet was offering the prayer in the shade of the Ka'ba. Abu
Jahl and some Quraishi men sent somebody to bring the abdominal
contents of a shecamel which had been slaughtered somewhere in Mecca,
and when he brought them, they put them over the Prophet Then Fatima
(i.e. the Prophet's daughter) came and threw them away from him, and he
said, "O Allah! Destroy (the pagans of) Quraish; O Allah! Destroy Quraish; O
Allah Destroy Quraish," naming especially Abu Jahl bin Hisham, 'Utba bin
Rabi'a, Shaiba bin Rabi'a, Al Walid bin 'Utba, Ubai bin Khalaf and 'Uqba bin
Abi Mitt. (The narrator, 'Abdullah added, "I saw them all killed and thrown in
the Badr well).

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 186:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Once the Jews came to the Prophet and said, "Death be upon you." So I
cursed them. The Prophet said, "What is the matter?" I said, "Have you not
heard what they said?" The Prophet said, "Have you not heard what I replied
(to them)? (I said), ('The same is upon you.')"

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 187:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abbas:
Allah's Apostle wrote a letter to Caesar saying, "If you reject Islam, you will
be responsible for the sins of the peasants (i.e. your people)."
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 188:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Tufail bin 'Amr Ad-Dausi and his companions came to the Prophet and said,
"O Allah's Apostle! The people of the tribe of Daus disobeyed and refused to
follow you; so invoke Allah against them." The people said, "The tribe of
Daus is ruined." The Prophet said, "O Allah! Give guidance to the people of
Daus, and let them embrace Islam."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 189:
Narrated Anas:
When the Prophet intended to write a letter to the ruler of the Byzantines,
he was told that those people did not read any letter unless it was stamped
with a seal. So, the Prophet got a silver ring-- as if I were just looking at its
white glitter on his hand ---- and stamped on it the expression "Muhammad,
Apostle of Allah".

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 190:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle sent his letter to Khusrau and ordered his messenger to hand
it over to the Governor of Bahrain who was to hand it over to Khusrau. So,
when Khusrau read the letter he tore it. Said bin Al-Musaiyab said, "The
Prophet then invoked Allah to disperse them with full dispersion, (destroy
them (i.e. Khusrau and his followers) severely)".

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 191:
Narrated Abdullah bin Abbas:
Allah's Apostle wrote to Caesar and invited him to Islam and sent him his
letter with Dihya Al-Kalbi whom Allah's Apostle ordered to hand it over to
the Governor of Busra who would forward it to Caesar. Caesar as a sign of
gratitude to Allah, had walked from Hims to Ilya (i.e. Jerusalem) when Allah
had granted Him victory over the Persian forces. So, when the letter of
Allah's Apostle reached Caesar, he said after reading t, 'Seek for me any one
of his people! (Arabs of Quraish tribe) if present here, in order to ask him
about Allah's Apostle. At that time Abu Sufyan bin Harb was in Sham with
some men frown Quraish who had come (to Sham) as merchants during the
truce that had been concluded between Allah's Apostle; and the infidels of
Quraish. Abu Sufyan said, Caesar's messenger found us somewhere in Sham
so he took me and my companions to Ilya and we were admitted into
Ceasar's court to find him sitting in his royal court wearing a crown and
surrounded by the senior dignitaries of the Byzantine. He said to his
translator. 'Ask them who amongst them is a close relation to the man who
claims to be a prophet." Abu Sufyan added, "I replied, 'I am the nearest
relative to him.' He asked, 'What degree of relationship do you have with
him?' I replied, 'He is my cousin,' and there was none of Bani Abu Manaf in
the caravan except myself. Caesar said, 'Let him come nearer.' He then
ordered that my companions stand behind me near my shoulder and said to
his translator, 'Tell his companions that I am going to ask this man about the
man who claims to be a prophet. If he tells a lie, they should contradict him
immediately." Abu Sufyan added, "By Allah ! Had it not been shameful that
my companions label me a liar, I would not have spoken the truth about him
when he asked me. But I considered it shameful to be called a liar by my
companions. So I told the truth. He then said to his translator, 'Ask him what
kind of family does he belong to.' I replied, 'He belongs to a noble family
amongst us.' He said, 'Have anybody else amongst you ever claimed the
same before him? 'I replied, 'No.' He said, 'Had you ever blamed him for
telling lies before he claimed what he claimed? ' I replied, 'No.' He said, 'Was
anybody amongst his ancestors a king?' I replied, 'No.' He said, "Do the
noble or the poor follow him?' I replied, 'It is the poor who follow him.' He
said, 'Are they increasing or decreasing (day by day)?' I replied,' They are
increasing.' He said, 'Does anybody amongst those who embrace his (the
Prophet's) Religion become displeased and then discard his Religion?'. I
replied, 'No. ' He said, 'Does he break his promises? I replied, 'No, but we are
now at truce with him and we are afraid that he may betray us." Abu Sufyan
added, "Other than the last sentence, I could not say anything against him.
Caesar then asked, 'Have you ever had a war with him?' I replied, 'Yes.' He
said, 'What was the outcome of your battles with him?' I replied, 'The result
was unstable; sometimes he was victorious and sometimes we.' He said,
'What does he order you to do?' I said, 'He tells us to worship Allah alone,
and not to worship others along with Him, and to leave all that our forefathers used to worship. He orders us to pray, give in charity, be chaste,
keep promises and return what is entrusted to us.' When I had said that,
Caesar said to his translator, 'Say to him: I ask you about his lineage and your
reply was that he belonged to a noble family. In fact, all the apostles came
from the noblest lineage of their nations. Then I questioned you whether
anybody else amongst you had claimed such a thing, and your reply was in
the negative. If the answer had been in the affirmative, I would have
thought that this man was following a claim that had been said before him.
When I asked you whether he was ever blamed for telling lies, your reply
was in the negative, so I took it for granted that a person who did not tell a
lie about (others) the people could never tell a lie about Allah. Then I asked
you whether any of his ancestors was a king. Your reply was in the negative,
and if it had been in the affirmative, I would have thought that this man
wanted to take back his ancestral kingdom. When I asked you whether the
rich or the poor people followed him, you replied that it was the poor who
followed him. In fact, such are the followers of the apostles. Then I asked
you whether his followers were increasing or decreasing. You replied that
they were increasing. In fact, this is the result of true faith till it is complete
(in all respects). I asked you whether there was anybody who, after
embracing his religion, became displeased and discarded his religion; your
reply was in the negative. In fact, this is the sign of true faith, for when its
cheerfulness enters and mixes in the hearts completely, nobody will be
displeased with it. I asked you whether he had ever broken his promise. You
replied in the negative. And such are the apostles; they never break their
promises. When I asked you whether you fought with him and he fought
with you, you replied that he did, and that sometimes he was victorious and
sometimes you. Indeed, such are the apostles; they are put to trials and the
final victory is always theirs. Then I asked you what he ordered you. You
replied that he ordered you to worship Allah alone and not to worship
others along with Him, to leave all that your fore-fathers used to worship, to
offer prayers, to speak the truth, to be chaste, to keep promises, and to
return what is entrusted to you. These are really the qualities of a prophet
who, I knew (from the previous Scriptures) would appear, but I did not
know that he would be from amongst you. If what you say should be true,
he will very soon occupy the earth under my feet, and if I knew that I would
reach him definitely, I would go immediately to meet Him; and were I with
him, then I would certainly wash his feet.' " Abu Sufyan added, "Caesar then
asked for the letter of Allah's Apostle and it was read. Its contents were:-"In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful (This letter is)
from Muhammad, the slave of Allah, and His Apostle, to Heraculius, the
Ruler of the Byzantine. Peace be upon the followers of guidance. Now then,
I invite you to Islam (i.e. surrender to Allah), embrace Islam and you will be
safe; embrace Islam and Allah will bestow on you a double reward. But if
you reject this invitation of Islam, you shall be responsible for misguiding the
peasants (i.e. your nation). O people of the Scriptures! Come to a word
common to you and us and you, that we worship. None but Allah, and that
we associate nothing in worship with Him; and that none of us shall take
others as Lords besides Allah. Then if they turn away, say: Bear witness that
we are (they who have surrendered (unto Him)..(3.64)
Abu Sufyan added, "When Heraclius had finished his speech, there was a
great hue and cry caused by the Byzantine Royalties surrounding him, and
there was so much noise that I did not understand what they said. So, we
were turned out of the court. When I went out with my companions and we
were alone, I said to them, 'Verily, Ibn Abi Kabsha's (i.e. the Prophet's) affair
has gained power. This is the King of Bani Al-Asfar fearing him." Abu Sufyan
added, "By Allah, I remained low and was sure that his religion would be
victorious till Allah converted me to Islam, though I disliked it "

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 192:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
That he heard the Prophet on the day (of the battle) of Khaibar saying, "I
will give the flag to a person at whose hands Allah will grant victory." So, the
companions of the Prophet got up, wishing eagerly to see to whom the flag
will be given, and everyone of them wished to be given the flag. But the
Prophet asked for 'Ali. Someone informed him that he was suffering from
eye-trouble. So, he ordered them to bring 'Ali in front of him. Then the
Prophet spat in his eyes and his eyes were cured immediately as if he had
never any eye-trouble. 'Ali said, "We will fight with them (i.e. infidels) till
they become like us (i.e. Muslims)." The Prophet said, "Be patient, till you
face them and invite them to Islam and inform them of what Allah has
enjoined upon them. By Allah! If a single person embraces Islam at your
hands (i.e. through you), that will be better for you than the red camels."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 193:
Narrated Anas:
Whenever Allah's Apostle attacked some people, he would never attack
them till it was dawn. If he heard the Adhan (i.e. call for prayer) he would
delay the fight, and if he did not hear the Adhan, he would attack them
immediately after dawn. We reached Khaibar at night.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 195:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet set out for Khaibar and reached it at night. He used not to
attack if he reached the people at night, till the day broke. So, when the day
dawned, the Jews came out with their bags and spades. When they saw the
Prophet; they said, "Muhammad and his army!" The Prophet said, Allahu-Akbar! (Allah is Greater) and Khaibar is ruined, for whenever we approach a
nation (i.e. enemy to fight) then it will be a miserable morning for those who
have been warned."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 196:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah 's Apostle said, " I have been ordered to fight with the people till they
say, 'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah,' and whoever says,
'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah,' his life and property will be
saved by me except for Islamic law, and his accounts will be with Allah,
(either to punish him or to forgive him.)"

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 197:
Narrated Ka'b bin Malik:
Whenever Allah's Apostle intended to lead a Ghazwa, he would use an
equivocation from which one would understand that he was going to a
different destination .

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 198:
Narrated Ka'b bin Malik:
Whenever Allah's Apostle intended to carry out a Ghazwa, he would use an
equivocation to conceal his real destination till it was the Ghazwa of Tabuk
which Allah's Apostle carried out in very hot weather. As he was going to
face a very long journey through a wasteland and was to meet and attack a
large number of enemies. So, he made the situation clear to the Muslims so
that they might prepare themselves accordingly and get ready to conquer
their enemy. The Prophet informed them of the destination he was heading
for (Ka'b bin Malik used to say, "Scarcely did Allah's Apostle set out for a
journey on a day other than Thursday.")
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 199:
Narrated Ka'b bin Malik:
The Prophet set out on Thursday for the Ghazwa of Tabuk and he used to
prefer to set out (i.e. travel) on Thursdays.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 200:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet offered a four-Rak'at Zuhr prayer at Medina and then offered a
two Rak'at 'Asr prayer at Dhul-Hulaifa and I heard the companions of the
Prophet reciting Talbiya aloud (for Hajj and 'Umra) altogether.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 201:
Narrated 'Aisha:
We set out in the company of Allah's Apostle five days before the end of
Dhul Qa'da intending to perform Hajj only. When we approached Mecca
Allah's Apostle ordered those who did not have the Hadi (i.e. an animal for
sacrifice) with them, to perform the Tawaf around the Ka'ba, and between
Safa and Marwa and then finish their Ihram. Beef was brought to us on the
day of (i.e. the days of slaughtering) and I asked, "What is this?" Somebody
said, Allah's Apostle has slaughtered (a cow) on behalf of his wives."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 202:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Once the Prophet set out in the month of Ramadan. He observed fasting till
he reached a place called Kadid where he broke his fast.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 203:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The 'Prophet said, "It is obligatory for one to listen to and obey (the ruler's
orders) unless these orders involve one disobedience (to Allah); but if an act
of disobedience (to Allah) is imposed, he should not listen to or obey it."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 204:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
That heard Allah's Apostle saying, "We are the last but will be the foremost
to enter Paradise)." The Prophet added, "He who obeys me, obeys Allah,
and he who disobeys me, disobeys Allah. He who obeys the chief, obeys me,
and he who disobeys the chief, disobeys me. The Imam is like a shelter for
whose safety the Muslims should fight and where they should seek
protection. If the Imam orders people with righteousness and rules justly,
then he will be rewarded for that, and if he does the opposite, he will be
responsible for that."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 205:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
When we reached (Hudaibiya) in the next year (of the treaty of Hudaibiya),
not even two men amongst us agreed unanimously as to which was the tree
under which we had given the pledge of allegiance, and that was out of
Allah's Mercy. (The sub narrator asked Naf'i, "For what did the Prophet take
their pledge of allegiance, was it for death?" Naf'i replied "No, but he took
their pledge of allegiance for patience.")

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 206:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid:
that in the time (of the battle) of Al-Harra a person came to him and said,
"Ibn Hanzala is taking the pledge of allegiance from the people for death."
He said, "I will never give a pledge of allegiance for such a thing to anyone
after Allah's Apostle."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 207:
Narrated Yazid bin Ubaid:
Salama said, "I gave the Pledge of allegiance (Al-Ridwan) to Allah's Apostle
and then I moved to the shade of a tree. When the number of people
around the Prophet diminished, he said, 'O Ibn Al-Akwa ! Will you not give to
me the pledge of Allegiance?' I replied, 'O Allah's Apostle! I have already
given to you the pledge of Allegiance.' He said, 'Do it again.' So I gave the
pledge of allegiance for the second time." I asked 'O Abu Muslim! For what
did you give he pledge of Allegiance on that day?" He replied, "We gave the
pledge of Allegiance for death."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 208:
Narrated Anas:
On the day (of the battle) of the Trench, the Ansar were saying, "We are
those who have sworn allegiance to Muhammad for Jihaid (for ever) as long
as we live." The Prophet replied to them, "O Allah! There is no life except the
life of the Hereafter. So honor the Ansar and emigrants with Your
Generosity."
And Narrated Mujashi: My brother and I came to the Prophet and I
requested him to take the pledge of allegiance from us for migration. He
said, "Migration has passed away with its people." I asked, "For what will
you take the pledge of allegiance from us then?" He said, "I will take (the
pledge) for Islam and Jihad."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 209:
Narrated Abdullah:
Today a man came to me and asked me a question which I did not know
how to answer. He said, "Tell me, if a wealthy active man, well-equipped
with arms, goes out on military expeditions with our chiefs, and orders us to
do such things as we cannot do (should we obey him?)" I replied, "By Allah, I
do not know what to reply you, except that we, were in the company of the
Prophet and he used to order us to do a thing once only till we finished it.
And no doubt, everyone among you will remain in a good state as long as he
obeys Allah. If one is in doubt as to the legality of something, he should ask
somebody who would satisfy him, but soon will come a time when you will
not find such a man. By Him, except Whom none has the right to be
worshipped. I see that the example of what has passed of this life (to what
remains thereof) is like a pond whose fresh water has been used up and
nothing remains but muddy water."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 210:
Narrated Salim Abu An-Nadr:
The freed slave of 'Umar bin 'Ubaidullah who was 'Umar's clerk: 'Abdullah
bin Abi Aufa wrote him (i.e. 'Umar) a letter that contained the following:-"Once Allah's Apostle (during a holy battle), waited till the sun had declined
and then he got up among the people and said, "O people! Do not wish to
face the enemy (in a battle) and ask Allah to save you (from calamities) but if
you should face the enemy, then be patient and let it be known to you that
Paradise is under the shades of swords." He then said,, "O Allah! The
Revealer of the (Holy) Book, the Mover of the clouds, and Defeater of AlAhzab (i.e. the clans of infidels), defeat them infidels and bestow victory
upon us."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 211:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
I participated in a Ghazwa along with Allah's Apostle The Prophet met me
(on the way) while I was riding a camel of ours used for irrigation and it had
got so tired that it could hardly walk. The Prophet asked me, "What is wrong
with the camel?" I replied, "It has got tired." So. Allah's Apostle came from
behind it and rebuked it and prayed for it so it started surpassing the other
camels and going ahead of them. Then he asked me, "How do you find your
camel (now)?" I replied, "I find it quite well, now as it has received your
blessings." He said, "Will you sell it to me?" I felt shy (to refuse his offer)
though it was the only camel for irrigation we had. So, I said, "Yes." He said,
"Sell it to me then." I sold it to him on the condition that I should keep on
riding it till I reached Medina. Then I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I am a
bridegroom," and requested him to allow me to go home. He allowed me,
and I set out for Medina before the people till I reached Medina, where I
met my uncle, who asked me about the camel and I informed him all about it
and he blamed me for that. When I took the permission of Allah's Apostle he
asked me whether I had married a virgin or a matron and I replied that I had
married a matron. He said, "Why hadn't you married a virgin who would
have played with you, and you would have played with her?" I replied, "O
Allah's Apostle! My father died (or was martyred) and I have some young
sisters, so I felt it not proper that I should marry a young girl like them who
would neither teach them manners nor serve them. So, I have married a
matron so that she may serve them and teach them manners." When Allah's
Apostle arrived in Medina, I took the camel to him the next morning and he
gave me its price and gave me the camel itself as well.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 212:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Once there was a feeling of fright at Medina, so Allah's Apostle rode a horse
belonging to Abu Talha and (on his return) he said, "We have not seen
anything (fearful), but we found this horse very fast."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 213:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Once the people got frightened, so Allah's Apostle rode a slow horse
belonging to Abu Talha, and he set out all alone, making the horse gallop.
Then the people rode, making their horses gallop after him. On his return he
said, "Don't be afraid (there is nothing to be afraid of) (and I have found)
this horse a very fast one." That horse was never excelled in running hence
forward. (Qastalani Vol. 5)

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 214:
Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:
I gave a horse to be used in Allah's Cause, but later on I saw it being sold. I
asked the Prophet whether I could buy it. He said, "Don't buy it and don't
take back your gift of charity."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 215:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
'Umar gave a horse to be used in Allah's Cause, but later on he found it
being sold. So, he intended to buy it and asked Allah's Apostle who said,
"Don't buy it and don't take back your gift of charity."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 216:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Were it not for the fear that it would be difficult for my
followers, I would not have remained behind any Sariya, (army-unit) but I
don't have riding camels and have no other means of conveyance to carry
them on, and it is hard for me that my companions should remain behind
me. No doubt I wish I could fight in Allah's Cause and be martyred and come
to life again to be martyred and come to life once more."
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 217:
Narrated Yali:
I participated in the Ghazwa of Tabuk along with Allah's Apostle and I gave a
young camel to be ridden in Jihad and that was, to me, one of my best
deeds. Then I employed a laborer who quarrelled with another person. One
of them bit the hand of the other and the latter drew his hand from the
mouth of the former pulling out his front tooth. Then the former instituted a
suit against the latter before the Prophet who rejected that suit saying, "Do
you expect him to put out his hand for you to snap as a male camel snaps
(vegetation)?"

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 218:
Narrated Tha'laba bin Abi Malik Al-Qurazi:
When Qais bin Sad Al-Ansari, who used to carry the flag of the Prophet,
intended to perform Hajj, he combed his hair.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 219c:
Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa:
Ali remained behind the Prophet during the battle of Khaibar as he way
suffering from some eye trouble but then he said, "How should I stay behind
Allah's Apostle?" So, he set out till he joined the Prophet. On the eve of the
day of the conquest of Khaibar, Allah's Apostle said, "(No doubt) I will give
the flag or, tomorrow, a man whom Allah and His Apostle love or who loves
Allah and His apostle will take the flag. Allah will bestow victory upon him."
Suddenly 'Ali joined us though we were not expecting him. The people said,
"Here is 'Ali. "So, Allah's Apostle gave the flag to him and Allah bestowed
victory upon him.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 219n:
Narrated Nafi bin Jubair:
I heard Al Abbas telling Az-Zubair, "The Prophet ordered you to fix the flag
here."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 220:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "I have been sent with the shortest expressions bearing
the widest meanings, and I have been made victorious with terror (cast in
the hearts of the enemy), and while I was sleeping, the keys of the treasures
of the world were brought to me and put in my hand." Abu Huraira added:
Allah's Apostle has left the world and now you, people, are bringing out
those treasures (i.e. the Prophet did not benefit by them).

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 221:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Abu Sufyan said, "Heraclius sent for me when I was in 'llya' (i.e. Jerusalem).
Then he asked for the letter of Allah's Apostle and when he had finished its
reading there was a great hue and cry around him and the voices grew
louder and we were asked to quit the place. When we were turned out, I
said to my companions, 'The cause of Ibn Abi Kabsha has become
conspicuous as the King of Bani Al-Asfar is afraid of him.' "

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 222:
Narrated Asma:
I prepared the journey-food for Allah's Apostle in Abu Bakr's house when he
intended to emigrate to Medina. I could not find anything to tie the foodcontainer and the water skin with. So, I said to Abu Bakr, "By Allah, I do not
find anything to tie (these things) with except my waist belt." He said, "Cut
it into two pieces and tie the water-skin with one piece and the food-
container with the other (the sub-narrator added, "She did accordingly and
that was the reason for calling her Dhatun-Nitaqain (i.e. two-belted
woman))."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 223:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
During the life-time of the Prophet we used to take the meat of sacrificed
animals (as journey food) to Medina. (See Hadith No. 474 Vol. 7)

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 224:
Narrated Suwaid bin An-Nu'man:
That he went out in the company o; the Prophet during the year of Khaibar
(campaign till they reached a place called As-Sahba', the lower part of
Khaibar. They offered the 'Asr prayer (there) and the Prophet asked for the
food. Nothing but Sawiq was brought to the Prophet. So, they chewed it
and ate it and drank water. After that the Prophet got up, washed his
mouth, and they too washed their mouths and then offered the prayer.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 225:
Narrated Salama:
Once the journey-food of the people ran short and they were in great need.
So, they came to the Prophet to take his permission for slaughtering their
camels, and he permitted them. Then 'Umar met them and they informed
him about it. He said, "What will sustain you after your camels (are
finished)?" Then 'Umar went to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle!
What will sustain them after their camels (are finished)?" Allah's Apostle
said, "Make an announcement amongst the people that they should bring
all their remaining food (to me)." (They brought it and) the Prophet invoked
Allah and asked for His Blessings for it. Then he asked them to bring their
food utensils and the people started filling their food utensils with their
hands till they were satisfied. Allah's Apostle then said, "I testify that None
has the right to be worshipped but Allah, and I am His Apostle. "

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 226:
Narrated Wahb bin Kaisan:
Jabir bin 'Abdullah said, "We set out, and we were three-hundred men
carrying our journey-food on our shoulders. Then we began to eat a single
date each per day." A man asked (Jabir), "O Abu 'Abdullah! How could a
person be satisfied with a single date?" Jabir replied, "We realized the value
of that one date when we could not even have that much till we reached the
sea-shore, when all of a sudden we saw a huge fish cast by the sea. So, we
ate of it as much as we wished for eighteen days."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 227:
Narrated Aisha:
That she said, "O Allah's Apostle! Your companions are returning with the
reward of both Hajj and 'Umra, while I am returning with (the reward of)
Hajj only." He said to her, "Go, and let 'Abdur-Rahman (i.e. your brother)
make you sit behind him (on the animal)." So, he ordered 'AbdurRahman to
let her perform 'Umra from Al-Tan'im. Then the Prophet waited for her at
the higher region of Mecca till she returned.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 228:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Bakr As-Siddiq:
The Prophet ordered me to let 'Aisha sit behind me (on the animal) and to
let her perform 'Umra from At-Tan'im.
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 229:
Narrated Anas:
I was riding behind Abu Talha (on the same) riding animal) and (the
Prophet's companions) were reciting Talbiya aloud for both Hajj and 'Umra.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 230:
Narrated 'Urwa from Usama bin Zaid:
Allah's Apostle rode a donkey on which there was a saddle covered by a
velvet sheet and let Usama ride behind him (on the donkey).

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 231:
Narrated Nafi from 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle came to Mecca through its higher region on the day of the
Conquest (of Mecca) riding his she-camel on which Usama was riding behind
him. Bilal and 'Uthman bin Talha, one of the servants of the Ka'ba, were also
accompanying him till he made his camel kneel in the mosque and ordered
the latter to bring the key of the Ka'ba. He opened the door of the Ka'ba
and Allah's Apostle entered in the company of Usama, Bilal and 'Uthman,
and stayed in it for a long period. When he came out, the people rushed to
it, and 'Abdullah bin 'Umar was the first to enter it and found Bilal standing
behind the door. He asked Bilal, "Where did the Prophet offer his prayer?"
He pointed to the place where he had offered his prayer. 'Abdullah said, "I
forgot to ask him how many Rakat he had performed."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 232:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "There is a (compulsory) Sadaqa (charity) to be given
for every joint of the human body (as a sign of gratitude to Allah) everyday
the sun rises. To judge justly between two persons is regarded as Sadaqa,
and to help a man concerning his riding animal by helping him to ride it or by
lifting his luggage on to it, is also regarded as Sadaqa, and (saying) a good
word is also Sadaqa, and every step taken on one's way to offer the
compulsory prayer (in the mosque) is also Sadaqa and to remove a harmful
thing from the way is also Sadaqa."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 233:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle forbade the people to travel to a hostile country carrying
(copies of) the Quran.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 234:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet reached Khaibar in the morning, while the people were coming
out carrying their spades over their shoulders. When they saw him they said,
"This is Muhammad and his army! Muhammad and his army!" So, they took
refuge in the fort. The Prophet raised both his hands and said, "Allahu
Akbar, Khaibar is ruined, for when we approach a nation (i.e. enemy to fight)
then miserable is the morning of the warned ones." Then we found some
donkeys which we (killed and) cooked: The announcer of the Prophet
announced: "Allah and His Apostle forbid you to eat donkey's meat." So, all
the pots including their contents were turned upside down.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 235:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari:
We were in the company of Allah's Apostle (during Hajj). Whenever we went
up a high place we used to say: "None has the right to be worshipped but
Allah, and Allah is Greater," and our voices used to rise, so the Prophet said,
"O people! Be merciful to yourselves (i.e. don't raise your voice), for you are
not calling a deaf or an absent one, but One Who is with you, no doubt He is
All-Hearer, ever Near (to all things)."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 236:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Whenever we went up a place we would say, "Allahu--Akbar (i.e. Allah is
Greater)", and whenever we went down a place we would say, "Subhan
Allah."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 237:
Narrated Jabir:
Whenever we went up a place we would say Takbir, and whenever we went
down we would say, "Subhan Allah."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 238:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
Whenever the Prophet returned from the Hajj or the 'Umra or a Ghazwa, he
would say Takbir thrice. Whenever he came upon a mountain path or
wasteland, and then he would say, "None has the right to be worshipped
but Allah, Alone Who has no partner. All the Kingdom belongs to Him and all
the praises are for Him and He is Omnipotent. We are returning with
repentance, worshipping, prostrating ourselves and praising our Lord. Allah
fulfilled His Promise, granted victory to His slave and He Alone defeated all
the clans."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 239:
Narrated Ibrahim Abu Isma'il As-Saksaki
I heard Abu Burda who accompanied Yazid bin Abi Kabsha on a journey.
Yazid used to observe fasting on journeys. Abu Burda said to him, "I heard
Abu Musa several times saying that Allah's Apostle said, 'When a slave falls
ill or travels, then he will get reward similar to that he gets for good deeds
practiced at home when in good health."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 240:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
On the day of the battle of the Trench, the Prophet wanted somebody from
amongst the people to volunteer to be a reconnoitre. Az-Zubair
volunteered. He demanded the same again and Az-Zubair volunteered
again. Then he repeated the same demand (thrice) and AzZubair
volunteered once more. The Prophet then said, " Every prophet has a
disciple and my disciple is Az-Zubair."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 241:
Narrated Ibn' Umar:
from the Prophet the following Hadith (No. 242).

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 242:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "If the people knew what I know about traveling alone,
then nobody would travel alone at night."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 243:
Narrated Hisham's father:
Usama bin Zaid was asked at what pace the Prophet rode during Hajjat-ulWada' "He rode at a medium pace, but when he came upon an open way he
would go at full pace."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 244:
Narrated Aslam:
While I was in the company of 'Abdullah bin 'Umar on the way to Mecca, he
received the news of the severe illness of Safiya bint Abi Ubaid (i.e. his wife),
so he proceeded at greater speed, and when the twilight disappeared, he
dismounted and offered the Maghrib and 'Isha 'prayers together and said, "
I saw the Prophet delaying the Maghrib prayer to offer it along with the
'Isha' when he was in a hurry on a journey."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 245:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Journey is a piece of torture, for it disturbs one's sleep,
eating and drinking. So, when you fulfill your job, you should hurry up to
your family."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 246:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Umar bin Al-Khattab gave a horse to be ridden in Allah's Cause and then he
found it being sold. He intended to purchase it. So, he consulted Allah's
Apostle who said, "Don't buy it and don't take back your gift of charity."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 247:
Narrated Aslam:
I heard 'Umar bin Al-Khattab saying, "I gave a horse to be ridden in Allah's
Cause and the person who got it intended to sell it or neglected it. So, I
wanted to buy it as I thought he would sell it cheap. I consulted the Prophet
who said, "Do not buy it even if for one Dirham, because he who takes back
his gift is like a dog swallowing its vomit."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 248:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
A man came to the Prophet asking his permission to take part in Jihad. The
Prophet asked him, "Are your parents alive?" He replied in the affirmative.
The Prophet said to him, "Then exert yourself in their service."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 249:
Narrated Abu Bashir Al-Ansari:
That he was in the company of Allah's Apostle on some of his journeys. (The
sub-narrator 'Abdullah adds, "I think that Abu Bashir also said, 'And the
people were at their sleeping places.") Allah's Apostle sent a messenger
ordering: "There shall not remain any necklace of string or any other kind of
necklace round the necks of camels except it is cut off."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 250:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
That he heard the Prophet saying, "It is not permissible for a man to be
alone with a woman, and no lady should travel except with a Muhram (i.e.
her husband or a person whom she cannot marry in any case for ever; e.g.
her father, brother, etc.)." Then a man got up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I
have enlisted in the army for such-and-such Ghazwa and my wife is
proceeding for Hajj." Allah's Apostle said, "Go, and perform the Hajj with
your wife."
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 251:
Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin Abi Rafi:
I heard 'Ali saying, "Allah's Apostle sent me, Az-Zubair and Al-Miqdad
somewhere saying, 'Proceed till you reach Rawdat Khakh. There you will
find a lady with a letter. Take the letter from her.' " So, we set out and our
horses ran at full pace till we got at Ar-Rawda where we found the lady and
said (to her). "Take out the letter." She replied, "I have no letter with me."
We said, "Either you take out the letter or else we will take off your clothes."
So, she took it out of her braid. We brought the letter to Allah's Apostle and
it contained a statement from Hatib bin Abi Balta a to some of the Meccan
pagans informing them of some of the intentions of Allah's Apostle. Then
Allah's Apostle said, "O Hatib! What is this?" Hatib replied, "O Allah's
Apostle! Don't hasten to give your judgment about me. I was a man closely
connected with the Quraish, but I did not belong to this tribe, while the
other emigrants with you, had their relatives in Mecca who would protect
their dependents and property . So, I wanted to recompense for my lacking
blood relation to them by doing them a favor so that they might protect my
dependents. I did this neither because of disbelief not apostasy nor out of
preferring Kufr (disbelief) to Islam." Allah's Apostle, said, "Hatib has told
you the truth." Umar said, O Allah's Apostle! Allow me to chop off the head
of this hypocrite." Allah's Apostle said, "Hatib participated in the battle of
Badr, and who knows, perhaps Allah has already looked at the Badr warriors
and said, 'Do whatever you like, for I have forgiven you."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 252:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
When it was the day (of the battle) of Badr, prisoners of war were brought
including Al-Abbas who was undressed. The Prophet looked for a shirt for
him. It was found that the shirt of 'Abdullah bin Ubai would do, so the
Prophet let him wear it. That was the reason why the Prophet took off and
gave his own shirt to 'Abdullah. (The narrator adds, "He had done the
Prophet some favor for which the Prophet liked to reward him.")

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 253:
Narrated Sahl:
On the day (of the battle) of Khaibar the Prophet said, "Tomorrow I will give
the flag to somebody who will be given victory (by Allah) and who loves
Allah and His Apostle and is loved by Allah and His Apostle." So, the people
wondered all that night as to who would receive the flag and in the morning
everyone hoped that he would be that person. Allah's Apostle asked,
"Where is 'Ali?" He was told that 'Ali was suffering from eye-trouble, so he
applied saliva to his eyes and invoked Allah to cure him. He at once got
cured as if he had no ailment. The Prophet gave him the flag. 'Ali said,
"Should I fight them till they become like us (i.e. Muslim)?" The Prophet said,
"Go to them patiently and calmly till you enter the land. Then, invite them to
Islam, and inform them what is enjoined upon them, for, by Allah, if Allah
gives guidance to somebody through you, it is better for you than
possessing red camels."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 254:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah wonders at those people who will enter Paradise in
chains."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 255:
Narrated Abu Burda's father:
The Prophet said, "Three persons will get their reward twice. (One is) a
person who has a slave girl and he educates her properly and teaches her
good manners properly (without violence) and then manumits and marries
her. Such a person will get a double reward. (Another is) a believer from the
people of the scriptures who has been a true believer and then he believes
in the Prophet (Muhammad). Such a person will get a double reward. (The
third is) a slave who observes Allah's Rights and Obligations and is sincere to
his master."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 256:
Narrated As-Sab bin Jaththama:
The Prophet passed by me at a place called Al-Abwa or Waddan, and was
asked whether it was permissible to attack the pagan warriors at night with
the probability of exposing their women and children to danger. The
Prophet replied, "They (i.e. women and children) are from them (i.e.
pagans)." I also heard the Prophet saying, "The institution of Hima is invalid
except for Allah and His Apostle."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 257:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
During some of the Ghazawat of the Prophet a woman was found killed.
Allah's Apostle disapproved the killing of women and children.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 258:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
During some of the Ghazawat of Allah's Apostle a woman was found killed,
so Allah's Apostle forbade the killing of women and children.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 259:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle sent us in a mission (i.e. am army-unit) and said, "If you find
so-and-so and so-and-so, burn both of them with fire." When we intended to
depart, Allah's Apostle said, "I have ordered you to burn so-and-so and soand-so, and it is none but Allah Who punishes with fire, so, if you find them,
kill them."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 260:
Narrated Ikrima:
Ali burnt some people and this news reached Ibn 'Abbas, who said, "Had I
been in his place I would not have burnt them, as the Prophet said, 'Don't
punish (anybody) with Allah's Punishment.' No doubt, I would have killed
them, for the Prophet said, 'If somebody (a Muslim) discards his religion, kill
him.' "

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 261:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
A group of eight men from the tribe of 'Ukil came to the Prophet and then
they found the climate of Medina unsuitable for them. So, they said, "O
Allah's Apostle! Provide us with some milk." Allah's Apostle said, "I
recommend that you should join the herd of camels." So they went and
drank the urine and the milk of the camels (as a medicine) till they became
healthy and fat. Then they killed the shepherd and drove away the camels,
and they became unbelievers after they were Muslims. When the Prophet
was informed by a shouter for help, he sent some men in their pursuit, and
before the sun rose high, they were brought, and he had their hands and
feet cut off. Then he ordered for nails which were heated and passed over
their eyes, and whey were left in the Harra (i.e. rocky land in Medina). They
asked for water, and nobody provided them with water till they died (Abu
Qilaba, a sub-narrator said, "They committed murder and theft and fought
against Allah and His Apostle, and spread evil in the land.")
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 262:
Narrated Jarir:
Allah's Apostles said to me, "Will you relieve me from Dhul-Khalasa? DhulKhalasa was a house (of an idol) belonging to the tribe of Khath'am called
Al-Ka'ba Al-Yama-niya. So, I proceeded with one hundred and fifty cavalry
men from the tribe of Ahmas, who were excellent knights. It happened that
I could not sit firm on horses, so the Prophet , stroke me over my chest till I
saw his finger-marks over my chest, he said, 'O Allah! Make him firm and
make him a guiding and rightly guided man.' " Jarir proceeded towards that
house, and dismantled and burnt it. Then he sent a messenger to Allah's
Apostle informing him of that. Jarir's messenger said, "By Him Who has sent
you with the Truth, I did not come to you till I had left it like an emancipated
or gabby camel (i.e. completely marred and spoilt)." Jarir added, "The
Prophet asked for Allah's Blessings for the horses and the men of Ahmas
five times."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 263:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet burnt the date-palms of Bani An-Nadir.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 264:
Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib:
Allah's Apostle sent a group of Ansari men to kill Abu-Rafi. One of them set
out and entered their (i.e. the enemies) fort. That man said, "I hid myself in a
stable for their animals. They closed the fort gate. Later they lost a donkey
of theirs, so they went out in its search. I, too, went out along with them,
pretending to look for it. They found the donkey and entered their fort. And
I, too, entered along with them. They closed the gate of the fort at night,
and kept its keys in a small window where I could see them. When those
people slept, I took the keys and opened the gate of the fort and came upon
Abu Rafi and said, 'O Abu Rafi. When he replied me, I proceeded towards
the voice and hit him. He shouted and I came out to come back, pretending
to be a helper. I said, 'O Abu Rafi, changing the tone of my voice. He asked
me, 'What do you want; woe to your mother?' I asked him, 'What has
happened to you?' He said, 'I don't know who came to me and hit me.' Then
I drove my sword into his belly and pushed it forcibly till it touched the bone.
Then I came out, filled with puzzlement and went towards a ladder of theirs
in order to get down but I fell down and sprained my foot. I came to my
companions and said, 'I will not leave till I hear the wailing of the women.'
So, I did not leave till I heard the women bewailing Abu Rafi, the merchant
pf Hijaz. Then I got up, feeling no ailment, (and we proceeded) till we came
upon the Prophet and informed him."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 265:
Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib:
Allah's Apostle sent a group of the Ansar to Abu Rafi. Abdullah bin Atik
entered his house at night and killed him while he was sleeping.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 266l:
Narrated Salim Abu An-Nadr:
(the freed slave of 'Umar bin 'Ubaidullah) I was Umar's clerk. Once Abdullah
bin Abi Aufa wrote a letter to 'Umar when he proceeded to Al-Haruriya. I
read in it that Allah's Apostle in one of his military expeditions against the
enemy, waited till the sun declined and then he got up amongst the people
saying, "O people! Do not wish to meet the enemy, and ask Allah for safety,
but when you face the enemy, be patient, and remember that Paradise is
under the shades of swords." Then he said, "O Allah, the Revealer of the
Holy Book, and the Mover of the clouds and the Defeater of the clans,
defeat them, and grant us victory over them."
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 266c:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said: "Do not wish to meet the enemy, but when you meet
face) the enemy, be patient."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 267:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Khosrau will be ruined, and there will be no Khosrau after
him, and Caesar will surely be ruined and there will be no Caesar after him,
and you will spend their treasures in Allah's Cause." He called, "War is
deceit'.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 268:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle called,: "War is deceit".

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 269:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "War is deceit."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 270:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "Who is ready to kill Ka'b bin Al-Ashraf who has really hurt
Allah and His Apostle?" Muhammad bin Maslama said, "O Allah's Apostle! Do
you like me to kill him?" He replied in the affirmative. So, Muhammad bin
Maslama went to him (i.e. Ka'b) and said, "This person (i.e. the Prophet) has
put us to task and asked us for charity." Ka'b replied, "By Allah, you will get
tired of him." Muhammad said to him, "We have followed him, so we dislike
to leave him till we see the end of his affair." Muhammad bin Maslama went
on talking to him in this way till he got the chance to kill him.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 271:
Narrated Jabir:
The Prophet said, "Who is ready to kill Ka'b bin Ashraf (i.e. a Jew)."
Muhammad bin Maslama replied, "Do you like me to kill him?" The Prophet
replied in the affirmative. Muhammad bin Maslama said, "Then allow me to
say what I like." The Prophet replied, "I do (i.e. allow you)."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 272:
Narrated Al-Bara:
I saw Allah's Apostle on the day (of the battle) of the Trench carrying earth
till the hair of his chest were covered with dust and he was a hairy man. He
was reciting the following verses of 'Abdullah (bin Rawaha): "O Allah, were
it not for You, We would not have been guided, Nor would we have given in
charity, nor prayed. So, bestow on us calmness, and when we meet the
enemy. Then make our feet firm, for indeed, Yet if they want to put us in
affliction, (i.e. want to fight against us) we would not (flee but withstand
them)." The Prophet used to raise his voice while reciting these verses. (See
Hadith No. 432, Vol. 5).

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 273:
Narrated Jarir:
Allah's Apostle did not screen himself from me since my embracing Islam,
and whenever he saw me he would receive me with a smile. Once I told him
that I could not sit firm on horses. He stroke me on the chest with his hand
and said, "O Allah! Make him firm and make him a guiding and a rightlyguided man."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 274:
Narrated Abu Hazim:
The people asked Sahl bin Sad As-Sa' idi "With what thing (medicine) was
the wound of Allah's Apostle treated?" He replied, "There is none left
(living) amongst the people who knows it better than. 'Ali used to bring
water in his shield and Fatima (i.e. the Prophet's daughter) used to wash the
blood off his face. Then a mat (of palm leaves) was burnt and its ash was
inserted in the wound of Allah's Apostle."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 275:
Narrated Abu Burda:
That his father said, "The Prophet sent Mu'adh and Abu Musa to Yemen
telling them. 'Treat the people with ease and don't be hard on them; give
them glad tidings and don't fill them with aversion; and love each other, and
don't differ."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 276:
Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib:
The Prophet appointed 'Abdullah bin Jubair as the commander of the
infantry men (archers) who were fifty on the day (of the battle) of Uhud. He
instructed them, "Stick to your place, and don't leave it even if you see birds
snatching us, till I send for you; and if you see that we have defeated the
infidels and made them flee, even then you should not leave your place till I
send for you." Then the infidels were defeated. By Allah, I saw the women
fleeing lifting up their clothes revealing their leg-bangles and their legs. So,
the companions of 'Abdullah bin Jubair said, "The booty! O people, the
booty ! Your companions have become victorious, what are you waiting for
now?" 'Abdullah bin Jubair said, "Have you forgotten what Allah's Apostle
said to you?" They replied, "By Allah! We will go to the people (i.e. the
enemy) and collect our share from the war booty." But when they went to
them, they were forced to turn back defeated. At that time Allah's Apostle
in their rear was calling them back. Only twelve men remained with the
Prophet and the infidels martyred seventy men from us.
On the day (of the battle) of Badr, the Prophet and his companions had
caused the 'Pagans to lose 140 men, seventy of whom were captured and
seventy were killed. Then Abu Sufyan asked thrice, "Is Muhammad present
amongst these people?" The Prophet ordered his companions not to answer
him. Then he asked thrice, "Is the son of Abu Quhafa present amongst these
people?" He asked again thrice, "Is the son of Al-Khattab present amongst
these people?" He then returned to his companions and said, "As for these
(men), they have been killed." 'Umar could not control himself and said (to
Abu Sufyan), "You told a lie, by Allah! O enemy of Allah! All those you have
mentioned are alive, and the thing which will make you unhappy is still
there." Abu Sufyan said, "Our victory today is a counterbalance to yours in
the battle of Badr, and in war (the victory) is always undecided and is shared
in turns by the belligerents, and you will find some of your (killed) men
mutilated, but I did not urge my men to do so, yet I do not feel sorry for
their deed" After that he started reciting cheerfully, "O Hubal, be high! (1)
On that the Prophet said (to his companions), "Why don't you answer him
back?" They said, "O Allah's Apostle What shall we say?" He said, "Say, Allah
is Higher and more Sublime." (Then) Abu Sufyan said, "We have the (idol) Al
Uzza, and you have no Uzza." The Prophet said (to his companions), "Why
don't you answer him back?" They asked, "O Allah's Apostle! What shall we
say?" He said, "Says Allah is our Helper and you have no helper."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 277:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle was the (most handsome), most generous and the bravest
of all the people. Once the people of Medina got frightened having heard an
uproar at night. So, the Prophet met the people while he was riding an
unsaddled horse belonging to Abu Talha and carrying his sword (slung over
his shoulder). He said (to them), "Don't get scared, don't get scared." Then
he added, "I found it (i.e the horse) very fast."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 278:
Narrated Salama:
I went out of Medina towards Al-Ghaba. When I reached the mountain path
of Al-Ghaba, a slave of 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf met me. I said to him, "Woe
to you! What brought you here?" He replied, "The she-camels of the Prophet
have been taken away." I said, "Who took them?" He said, "Ghatafan and
Fazara." So, I sent three cries, "O Sabaha-h ! O Sabahah !" so loudly that
made the people in between its (i.e. Medina's) two mountains hear me.
Then I rushed till I met them after they had taken the camels away. I started
throwing arrows at them saying, "I am the son of Al-Akwa"; and today
perish the mean people!" So, I saved the she-camels from them before they
(i.e. the robbers) could drink water. When I returned driving the camels, the
Prophet met me, I said, "O Allah's Apostle Those people are thirsty and I
have prevented them from drinking water, so send some people to chase
them." The Prophet said, "O son of Al-Akwa', you have gained power (over
your enemy), so forgive (them). (Besides) those people are now being
entertained by their folk."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 279:
Narrated Abu Ishaq:
A man asked Al-Bara "O Abu 'Umara! Did you flee on the day (of the battle)
of Hunain?" Al-Bara replied while I was listening, "As for Allah's Apostle he
did not flee on that day. Abu Sufyan bin Al-Harith was holding the reins of
his mule and when the pagans attacked him, he dismounted and started
saying, 'I am the Prophet, and there is no lie about it; I am the son of 'Abdul
Muttalib.' On that day nobody was seen braver than the Prophet
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 280:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
When the tribe of Bani Quraiza was ready to accept Sad's judgment, Allah's
Apostle sent for Sad who was near to him. Sad came, riding a donkey and
when he came near, Allah's Apostle said (to the Ansar), "Stand up for your
leader." Then Sad came and sat beside Allah's Apostle who said to him.
"These people are ready to accept your judgment." Sad said, "I give the
judgment that their warriors should be killed and their children and women
should be taken as prisoners." The Prophet then remarked, "O Sad! You
have judged amongst them with (or similar to) the judgment of the King
Allah."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 281:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle sent a Sariya of ten men as spies under the leadership of
'Asim bin Thabit al-Ansari, the grandfather of 'Asim bin Umar Al-Khattab.
They proceeded till they reached Hadaa, a place between 'Usfan, and
Mecca, and their news reached a branch of the tribe of Hudhail called Bani
Lihyan. About two-hundred men, who were all archers, hurried to follow
their tracks till they found the place where they had eaten dates they had
brought with them from Medina. They said, "These are the dates of Yathrib
(i.e. Medina), "and continued following their tracks When 'Asim and his
companions saw their pursuers, they went up a high place and the infidels
circled them. The infidels said to them, "Come down and surrender, and we
promise and guarantee you that we will not kill any one of you" 'Asim bin
Thabit; the leader of the Sariya said, "By Allah! I will not come down to be
under the protection of infidels. O Allah! Convey our news to Your Prophet.
Then the infidels threw arrows at them till they martyred 'Asim along with
six other men, and three men came down accepting their promise and
convention, and they were Khubaib-al-Ansari and Ibn Dathina and another
man So, when the infidels captured them, they undid the strings of their
bows and tied them. Then the third (of the captives) said, "This is the first
betrayal. By Allah! I will not go with you. No doubt these, namely the
martyred, have set a good example to us." So, they dragged him and tried to
compel him to accompany them, but as he refused, they killed him. They
took Khubaid and Ibn Dathina with them and sold them (as slaves) in Mecca
(and all that took place) after the battle of Badr. Khubaib was bought by the
sons of Al-Harith bin 'Amir bin Naufal bin 'Abd Manaf. It was Khubaib who
had killed Al-Harith bin 'Amir on the day (of the battle of) Badr. So, Khubaib
remained a prisoner with those people.
Narrated Az-Zuhri: 'Ubaidullah bin 'Iyyad said that the daughter of Al-Harith
had told him, "When those people gathered (to kill Khubaib) he borrowed a
razor from me to shave his pubes and I gave it to him. Then he took a son of
mine while I was unaware when he came upon him. I saw him placing my
son on his thigh and the razor was in his hand. I got scared so much that
Khubaib noticed the agitation on my face and said, 'Are you afraid that I will
kill him? No, I will never do so.' By Allah, I never saw a prisoner better than
Khubaib. By Allah, one day I saw him eating of a bunch of grapes in his hand
while he was chained in irons, and there was no fruit at that time in Mecca."
The daughter of Al-Harith used to say, "It was a boon Allah bestowed upon
Khubaib." When they took him out of the Sanctuary (of Mecca) to kill him
outside its boundaries, Khubaib requested them to let him offer two Rakat
(prayer). They allowed him and he offered Two Rakat and then said, "Hadn't
I been afraid that you would think that I was afraid (of being killed), I would
have prolonged the prayer. O Allah, kill them all with no exception." (He
then recited the poetic verse):-- "I being martyred as a Muslim, Do not mind
how I am killed in Allah's Cause, For my killing is for Allah's Sake, And if Allah
wishes, He will bless the amputated parts of a torn body" Then the son of Al
Harith killed him. So, it was Khubaib who set the tradition for any Muslim
sentenced to death in captivity, to offer a two-Rak'at prayer (before being
killed). Allah fulfilled the invocation of Asim bin Thabit on that very day on
which he was martyred. The Prophet informed his companions of their news
and what had happened to them. Later on when some infidels from Quraish
were informed that Asim had been killed, they sent some people to fetch a
part of his body (i.e. his head) by which he would be recognized. (That was
because) 'Asim had killed one of their chiefs on the day (of the battle) of
Badr. So, a swarm of wasps, resembling a shady cloud, were sent to hover
over Asim and protect him from their messenger and thus they could not
cut off anything from his flesh.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 282:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "Free the captives, feed the hungry and pay a visit to the
sick."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 283:
Narrated Abu Juhaifa:
I asked Ali, "Do you have the knowledge of any Divine Inspiration besides
what is in Allah's Book?" 'Ali replied, "No, by Him Who splits the grain of
corn and creates the soul. I don't think we have such knowledge, but we
have the ability of understanding which Allah may endow a person with, so
that he may understand the Qur'an, and we have what is written in this
paper as well." I asked, "What is written in this paper?" He replied, "(The
regulations of) blood-money, the freeing of captives, and the judgment that
no Muslim should be killed for killing an infidel."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 284:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Some Ansari men asked permission from Allah's Apostle saying, "O Allah's
Apostle! Allow us not to take the ransom of our nephew Al Abbas. The
Prophet replied, "Do not leave a single Dirham thereof."
(In another narration) Anas said, "Some wealth was brought to the Prophet
from Bahrain. Al Abbas came to him and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Give me
(some of it), as I have paid my and 'Aqil's ransom.' The Prophet said, 'Take,'
and gave him in his garment."
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 285:
Narrated Jubair:
(who was among the captives of the Battle of Badr) I heard the Prophet
reciting 'Surat-at-Tur' in the Maghrib prayer.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 286:
Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa:
"An infidel spy came to the Prophet while he was on a journey. The spy sat
with the companions of the Prophet and started talking and then went
away. The Prophet said (to his companions), 'Chase and kill him.' So, I killed
him." The Prophet then gave him the belongings of the killed spy (in
addition to his share of the war booty).

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 287:
Narrated 'Amr bin Maimun:
Umar (after he was stabbed), instructed (his would-be-successor) saying, "I
urge him (i.e. the new Caliph) to take care of those non-Muslims who are
under the protection of Allah and His Apostle in that he should observe the
convention agreed upon with them, and fight on their behalf (to secure
their safety) and he should not over-tax them beyond their capability."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 288:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
Ibn 'Abbas said, "Thursday! What (great thing) took place on Thursday!"
Then he started weeping till his tears wetted the gravels of the ground .
Then he said, "On Thursday the illness of Allah's Apostle was aggravated and
he said, "Fetch me writing materials so that I may have something written t
you after which you will never go astray." The people (present there)
differed in this matter and people should not differ before a prophet. They
said, "Allah's Apostle is seriously sick.' The Prophet said, "Let me alone, as
the state in which I am now, is better than what you are calling me for." The
Prophet on his death-bed, gave three orders saying, "Expel the pagans from
the Arabian Peninsula, respect and give gifts to the foreign delegates as you
have seen me dealing with them." I forgot the third (order)" (Ya'qub bin
Muhammad said, "I asked Al-Mughira bin 'Abdur-Rahman about the Arabian
Peninsula and he said, 'It comprises Mecca, Medina, Al-Yama-ma and
Yemen." Ya'qub added, "And Al-Arj, the beginning of Tihama.")

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 289:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
'Umar saw a silken cloak being sold in the market and he brought it to
Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Buy this cloak and adorn
yourself with it on the 'Id festivals and on meeting the delegations." Allah's
Apostle replied, "This is the dress for the one who will have no share in the
Hereafter (or, this is worn by one who will have no share in the Hereafter)."
After sometime had passed, Allah's Apostle sent a silken cloak to 'Umar.
'Umar took it and brought it to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle!
You have said that this is the dress of that who will have no share in the
Hereafter (or, this is worn by one who will have no share in the Hereafter),
yet you have sent me this!" The Prophet said," I have sent it) so that you
may sell it or fulfill with it some of your needs."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 290d:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Umar and a group of the companions of the Prophet set out with the
Prophet to Ibn Saiyad. He found him playing with some boys near the
hillocks of Bani Maghala. Ibn Saiyad at that time was nearing his puberty. He
did not notice (the Prophet's presence) till the Prophet stroked him on the
back with his hand and said, "Ibn Saiyad! Do you testify that I am Allah's
Apostle?" Ibn Saiyad looked at him and said, "I testify that you are the
Apostle of the illiterates."
Then Ibn Saiyad asked the Prophet. "Do you testify that I am the apostle of
Allah?" The Prophet said to him, "I believe in Allah and His Apostles." Then
the Prophet said (to Ibn Saiyad). "What do you see?" Ibn Saiyad replied,
"True people and false ones visit me." The Prophet said, "Your mind is
confused as to this matter." The Prophet added, " I have kept something (in
my mind) for you." Ibn Saiyad said, "It is Ad-Dukh." The Prophet said (to
him), "Shame be on you! You cannot cross your limits." On that 'Umar said,
"O Allah's Apostle! Allow me to chop his head off." The Prophet said, "If he
should be him (i.e. Ad-Dajjal) then you cannot overpower him, and should he
not be him, then you are not going to benefit by murdering him."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 290:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
(Later on) Allah's Apostle (once again) went along with Ubai bin Ka'b to the
garden of date-palms where Ibn Saiyad was staying. When the Prophet
entered the garden, he started hiding himself behind the trunks of the datepalms as he wanted to hear something from the Ibn Saiyad before the latter
could see him. Ibn Saiyad was lying in his bed, covered with a velvet sheet
from where his murmurs were heard. Ibn Saiyad's mother saw the Prophet
while he was hiding himself behind the trunks of the date-palms. She
addressed Ibn Saiyad, "O Saf!" (And this was his name). Ibn Saiyad got up.
The Prophet said, "Had this woman let him to himself, he would have
revealed the reality of his case." Then the Prophet got up amongst the
people, glorifying Allah as He deserves, he mentioned Ad-Dajjal, saying, "I
warn you about him (i.e. Ad-Dajjal) and there is no prophet who did not
warn his nation about him, and Noah warned his nation about him, but I tell
you a statement which no prophet informed his nation of. You should
understand that he is a one-eyed man and Allah is not one-eyed."
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 291:
Narrated Usama bin Zaid:
I asked the Prophet during his Hajj, "O Allah's Apostle! Where will you stay
tomorrow?" He said, "Has Aqil left for us any house?" He then added,
"Tomorrow we will stay at Khaif Bani Kinana, i.e. Al-Muhassab, where (the
Pagans of) Quraish took an oath of Kufr (i.e. to be loyal to heathenism) in
that Bani Kinana got allied with Quraish against Bani Hashim on the terms
that they would not deal with the members of the is tribe or give them
shelter." (Az-Zuhri said, "Khaif means valley.") (See Hadith No. 659, Vol. 2)

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 292:
Narrated Aslam:
Umar bin Al-Khattab appointed a freed slave of his, called Hunai, manager of
the Hima (i.e. a pasture devoted for grazing the animals of the Zakat or
other specified animals). He said to him, "O Hunai! Don't oppress the
Muslims and ward off their curse (invocations against you) for the
invocation of the oppressed is responded to (by Allah); and allow the
shepherd having a few camels and those having a few sheep (to graze their
animals), and take care not to allow the livestock of 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf
and the livestock of ('Uthman) bin 'Affan, for if their livestock should perish,
then they have their farms and gardens, while those who own a few camels
and those who own a few sheep, if their livestock should perish, would bring
their dependents to me and appeal for help saying, 'O chief of the believers!
O chief of the believers!' Would I then neglect them? (No, of course). So, I
find it easier to let them have water and grass rather than to give them gold
and silver (from the Muslims' treasury). By Allah, these people think that I
have been unjust to them. This is their land, and during the pre-lslamic
period, they fought for it and they embraced Islam (willingly) while it was in
their possession. By Him in Whose Hand my life is! Were it not for the
animals (in my custody) which I give to be ridden for striving in Allah's
Cause, I would not have turned even a span of their land into a Hima."
Volume 4, Book 52, Number 293:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
The Prophet said (to us), " List the names of those people who have
announced that they are Muslims." So, we listed one thousand and five
hundred men. Then we wondered, "Should we be afraid (of infidels)
although we are one thousand and five hundred in number?" No doubt, we
witnessed ourselves being afflicted with such bad trials that one would have
to offer the prayer alone in fear.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 294:
Narrated Al-Amash:
"We (listed the Muslims and) found them five hundred." And Abu Muawiya
said, "Between six-hundred to seven-hundred."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 295:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
A man came to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have enlisted in
the army for such-and-such Ghazwa, and my wife is leaving for Hajj." Allah's
Apostle said, "Go back and perform Hajj with your wife."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 296:
Narrated Az-Zuhri:
as follows in Hadith 297.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 297:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
We were in the company of Allah's Apostle in a Ghazwa, and he remarked
about a man who claimed to be a Muslim, saying, "This (man) is from the
people of the (Hell) Fire." When the battle started, the man fought violently
till he got wounded. Somebody said, "O Allah's Apostle! The man whom you
described as being from the people of the (Hell) Fire fought violently today
and died." The Prophet said, "He will go to the (Hell) Fire." Some people
were on the point of doubting (the truth of what the Prophet had said)
while they were in this state, suddenly someone said that he was still alive
but severely wounded. When night fell, he lost patience and committed
suicide. The Prophet was informed of that, and he said, "Allah is Greater! I
testify that I am Allah's Slave and His Apostle." Then he ordered Bilal to
announce amongst the people: 'None will enter Paradise but a Muslim, and
Allah may support this religion (i.e. Islam) even with a disobedient man.'

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 298:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle delivered a sermon and said, "Zaid received the flag and was
martyred, then Ja'far took it and was martyred, then 'Abdullah bin Rawaha
took it and was martyred, and then Khalid bin Al-Walid took it without being
appointed, and Allah gave him victory." The Prophet added, "I am not
pleased (or they will not be pleased) that they should remain (alive) with
us," while his eyes were shedding tears.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 299:
Narrated Anas:
The people of the tribes of Ril, Dhakwan, 'Usiya and Bani Lihyan came to the
Prophet and claimed that they had embraced Islam, and they requested him
to support them with some men to fight their own people. The Prophet
supported them with seventy men from the Ansar whom we used to call AlQurra'(i.e. Scholars) who (out of piety) used to cut wood during the day and
pray all the night. So, those people took the (seventy) men till they reached
a place called Bi'r-Ma'ana where they betrayed and martyred them. So, the
Prophet invoked evil on the tribe of Ril, Dhakwan and Bani Lihyan for one
month in the prayer.
Narrated Qatada: Anas told us that they (i.e. Muslims) used to recite a
Quranic Verse concerning those martyrs which was:-- "O Allah! Let our
people be informed on our behalf that we have met our Lord Who has got
pleased with us and made us pleased." Then the Verse was cancelled.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 300:
Narrated Abu Talha:
Whenever the Prophet conquered some people, he would stay in their town
for three days.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 301:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet performed 'Umra, setting out from Al-Jarana where he
distributed the war booty of Hunain.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 302:
Narrated Nafi:
Once a slave of Ibn 'Umar fled and joined the Byzantine. Khalid bin Al-Walid
got him back and returned him to 'Abdullah (bin 'Umar). Once a horse of Ibn
'Umar also ran away and followed the Byzantines, and he (i.e. Khalid) got it
back and returned it to 'Abdullah.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 303:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
That he was riding a horse on the day, the Muslims fought (against the
Byzantines), and the commander of the Muslim army was Khalid bin AlWalid who had been appointed by Abu Bakr. The enemy took the horse
away, and when the enemy was defeated, Khalid returned the horse to him.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 304:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! We have slaughtered a young sheep of ours and
have ground one Sa of barley. So, I invite you along with some persons." So,
the Prophet said in a loud voice, "O the people of the Trench! Jabir had
prepared "Sur" so come along."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 305:
Narrated Um Khalid:
(the daughter of Khalid bin Said) I went to Allah's Apostle with my father
and I was Nearing a yellow shirt. Allah's Apostle said, "Sanah, Sanah!"
('Abdullah, the narrator, said that 'Sanah' meant 'good' in the Ethiopian
language). I then started playing with the seal of Prophethood (in between
the Prophet's shoulders) and my father rebuked me harshly for that. Allah's
Apostle said. "Leave her," and then Allah's Apostle (invoked Allah to grant
me a long life) by saying (thrice), "Wear this dress till it is worn out and then
wear it till it is worn out, and then wear it till it is worn out." (The narrator
adds, "It is said that she lived for a long period, wearing that (yellow) dress
till its color became dark because of long wear.")

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 306:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Al-Hasan bin 'All took a date from the dates of the Sadaqa and put it in his
mouth. The Prophet said (to him) in Persian, "Kakh, kakh! (i.e. Don't you
know that we do not eat the Sadaqa (i.e. what is given in charity) (charity is
the dirt of the people))."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 307:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet got up amongst us and mentioned Al Ghulul, emphasized its
magnitude and declared that it was a great sin saying, "Don't commit Ghulul
for I should not like to see anyone amongst you on the Day of Ressurection,
carrying over his neck a sheep that will be bleating, or carrying over his neck
a horse that will be neighing. Such a man will be saying: 'O Allah's Apostle!
Intercede with Allah for me,' and I will reply, 'I can't help you, for I have
conveyed Allah's Message to you Nor should I like to see a man carrying
over his neck, a camel that will be grunting. Such a man will say, 'O Allah's
Apostle! Intercede with Allah for me, and I will say, 'I can't help you for I
have conveyed Allah's Message to you,' or one carrying over his neck gold
and silver and saying, 'O Allah's Apostle! Intercede with Allah for me,' and I
will say, 'I can't help you for I have conveyed Allah's Message to you,' or one
carrying clothes that will be fluttering, and the man will say, 'O Allah's
Apostle! Intercede with Allah for me.' And I will say, 'I can't help you, for I
have conveyed Allah's Message to you."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 308:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
There was a man who looked after the family and the belongings of the
Prophet and he was called Karkara. The man died and Allah's Apostle said,
"He is in the '(Hell) Fire." The people then went to look at him and found in
his place, a cloak he had stolen from the war booty.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 309:
Narrated Abaya bin Rifaa:
My grandfather, Rafi said, "We were in the company of the Prophet at
DhulHulaifa, and the people suffered from hunger. We got some camels and
sheep (as booty) and the Prophet was still behind the people. They hurried
and put the cooking pots on the fire. (When he came) he ordered that the
cooking pots should be upset and then he distributed the booty (amongst
the people) regarding ten sheep as equal to one camel then a camel fled and
the people chased it till they got tired, as they had a few horses (for chasing
it). So a man threw an arrow at it and caused it to stop (with Allah's
Permission). On that the Prophet said, 'Some of these animals behave like
wild beasts, so, if any animal flee from you, deal with it in the same way." My
grandfather asked (the Prophet ), "We hope (or are afraid) that we may
meet the enemy tomorrow and we have no knives. Can we slaughter our
animals with canes?" Allah's Apostle replied, "If the instrument used for
killing causes the animal to bleed profusely and if Allah's Name is mentioned
on killing it, then eat its meat (i.e. it is lawful) but won't use a tooth or a nail
and I am telling you the reason: A tooth is a bone (and slaughtering with a
bone is forbidden ), and a nail is the slaughtering instrument of the
Ethiopians."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 310:
Narrated Qais:
Jarir bin 'Abdullah said to me, "Allah's Apostle said to me, 'Won't you relieve
me from Dhul-Khalasa?' Dhul-Khalasa was a house where the tribe of
Khatham used to stay, and it used to be called Ka'bat-ul Yamaniya. So I
proceeded with one hundred-and-fifty (men) from the tribe of Ahmas who
were good cavalry. I informed the Prophet that I could not sit firm on
horses, so he stroke me on the chest with his hand and I noticed his finger
marks on my chest. He invoked, 'O Allah! Make him firm and a guiding and
rightly-guided man." Jarir set out towards that place, dismantled and burnt
it, and then sent the good news to Allah's Apostle . The messenger of Jarir
said to Allah's Apostle. "O Allah's Apostle! By Him Who has sent you with the
Truth, I did not come to you till it (i.e. the house) had been turned (black)
like a scabby camel (covered with tar)." So the Prophet invokes Allah to
Bless the horses of the men of Ahmas five times.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 311:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, on the day of the Conquest of Mecca, "There is no
migration (after the Conquest), but Jihad and good intentions, and when
you are called for Jihad, you should immediately respond to the call."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 312:
Narrated Abu Uthman An-Nahdi:
Mujashi (bin Mas'ud) took his brother Mujalid bin Musud to the Prophet and
said, "This is Mujalid and he will give a pledge of allegiance to you for
migration." The Prophet said, "There is no migration after the Conquest of
Mecca, but I will take his pledge of allegiance for Islam."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 313:
Narrated 'Ata':
I and 'Ubai bin 'Umar went to 'Aisha while she was staying near Thabir (i.e. a
mountain). She said, "There is no Migration after Allah gave His Prophet
victory over Mecca."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 314:
Narrated Sad bin 'Ubaida:
Abu Abdur-Rahman who was one of the supporters of Uthman said to Abu
Talha who was one of the supporters of Ali, "I perfectly know what
encouraged your leader (i.e. 'Ali) to shed blood. I heard him saying: Once the
Prophet sent me and Az-Zubair saying, 'Proceed to such-and-such Ar-Roudah
(place) where you will find a lady whom Hatib has given a letter. So when
we arrived at Ar-Roudah, we requested the lady to hand over the letter to
us. She said, 'Hatib has not given me any letter.' We said to her. 'Take out
the letter or else we will strip off your clothes.' So she took it out of her
braid. So the Prophet sent for Hatib, (who came) and said, 'Don't hurry in
judging me, for, by Allah, I have not become a disbeliever, and my love to
Islam is increasing. (The reason for writing this letter was) that there is none
of your companions but has relatives in Mecca who look after their families
and property, while I have nobody there, so I wanted to do them some favor
(so that they might look after my family and property).' The Prophet
believed him. 'Umar said, 'Allow me to chop off his (i.e. Hatib's) neck as he
has done hypocrisy.' The Prophet said, (to 'Umar), 'Who knows, perhaps
Allah has looked at the warriors of Badr and said (to them), 'Do whatever
you like, for I have forgiven you.' " 'Abdur-Rahman added, "So this is what
encouraged him (i.e. Ali)."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 315:
Narrated Ibn Abi Mulaika:
Ibn Az-Zubair said to Ibn Ja'far "Do you remember when I, you and Ibn
'Abbas went out to receive Allah's Apostle?" Ibn Ja'far replied in the
affirmative. Ibn Az-Zubair added, "And Allah's Apostle made us (i.e. I and Ibn
'Abbas) ride along with him and left you."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 316:
Narrated As-Sa'ib bin Yazid:
I along with some boys went out to receive Allah's Apostle at ThaniyatalWada'.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 317:
Narrated Abdullah:
When the Prophet returned (from Jihad), he would say Takbir thrice and
add, "We are returning, if Allah wishes, with repentance and worshipping
and praising (our Lord) and prostrating ourselves before our Lord. Allah
fulfilled His Promise and helped His Slave, and He Alone defeated the
(infidel) clans."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 318:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
We were in the company of the Prophet while returning from 'Usfan, and
Allah's Apostle was riding his she-camel keeping Safiya bint Huyay riding
behind him. His she-camel slipped and both of them fell down. Abu Talha
jumped from his camel and said, "O Allah's Apostle! May Allah sacrifice me
for you." The Prophet said, "Take care of the lady." So, Abu Talha covered
his face with a garment and went to Safiya and covered her with it, and then
he set right the condition of their shecamel so that both of them rode, and
we were encircling Allah's Apostle like a cover. When we approached
Medina, the Prophet said, "We are returning with repentance and
worshipping and praising our Lord." He kept on saying this till he entered
Medina.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 319:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
That he and Abu Talha came in the company of the Prophet and Safiya was
accompanying the Prophet, who let her ride behind him on his she-camel.
During the journey, the she-camel slipped and both the Prophet and (his)
wife fell down. Abu Talha (the sub-narrator thinks that Anas said that Abu
Talha jumped from his camel quickly) said, "O Allah's Apostle! May Allah
sacrifice me for your sake! Did you get hurt?" The Prophet replied,"No, but
take care of the lady." Abu Talha covered his face with his garment and
proceeded towards her and covered her with his garment, and she got up.
He then set right the condition of their she-camel and both of them (i.e. the
Prophet and his wife) rode and proceeded till they approached Medina. The
Prophet said, "We are returning with repentance and worshipping and
praising our Lord." The Prophet kept on saying this statement till he entered
Medina.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 320:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
I was on a journey in the company of the Prophet and when we reached
Medina, he said to me, "Enter the Mosque and offer two Rakat."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 321:
Narrated Ka'b:
Whenever the Prophet returned from a journey in the forenoon, he would
enter the Mosque and offer two Rakat before sitting.

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 322:
Narrated Muharib bin Dithar:
Jabir bin 'Abdullah said, "When Allah's Apostle arrived at Medina, he
slaughtered a camel or a cow." Jabir added, "The Prophet bought a camel
from me for two Uqiyas (of gold) and one or two Dirhams. When he reached
Sirar, he ordered that a cow be slaughtered and they ate its meat. When he
arrived at Medina, he ordered me to go to the Mosque and offer two Rakat,
and weighed (and gave) me the price of the camel."

Volume 4, Book 52, Number 323:
Narrated Jabir:
Once I returned from a journey and the Prophet said (to me) "Offer two
Rakat." (Sirar is a place near Medina).
BOOK 53. ONE-FIFTH OF BOOTY TO THE CAUSE OF ALLAH (KHUMUS) (324-412)
Volume 4, Book 53, Number 324:
Narrated Ali:
I got a she-camel in my share of the war booty on the day (of the battle) of
Badr, and the Prophet had given me a she-camel from the Khumus. When I
intended to marry Fatima, the daughter of Allah's Apostle, I had an
appointment with a goldsmith from the tribe of Bani Qainuqa' to go with me
to bring Idhkhir (i.e. grass of pleasant smell) and sell it to the goldsmiths and
spend its price on my wedding party. I was collecting for my she-camels
equipment of saddles, sacks and ropes while my two she-camels were
kneeling down beside the room of an Ansari man. I returned after collecting
whatever I collected, to see the humps of my two she-camels cut off and
their flanks cut open and some portion of their livers was taken out. When I
saw that state of my two she-camels, I could not help weeping. I asked,
"Who has done this?" The people replied, "Hamza bin Abdul Muttalib who is
staying with some Ansari drunks in this house." I went away till I reached the
Prophet and Zaid bin Haritha was with him. The Prophet noticed on my face
the effect of what I had suffered, so the Prophet asked. "What is wrong
with you." I replied, "O Allah's Apostle! I have never seen such a day as
today. Hamza attacked my two she-camels, cut off their humps, and ripped
open their flanks, and he is sitting there in a house in the company of some
drunks." The Prophet then asked for his covering sheet, put it on, and set
out walking followed by me and Zaid bin Haritha till he came to the house
where Hamza was. He asked permission to enter, and they allowed him, and
they were drunk. Allah's Apostle started rebuking Hamza for what he had
done, but Hamza was drunk and his eyes were red. Hamza looked at Allah's
Apostle and then he raised his eyes, looking at his knees, then he raised up
his eyes looking at his umbilicus, and again he raised up his eyes look in at his
face. Hamza then said, "Aren't you but the slaves of my father?" Allah's
Apostle realized that he was drunk, so Allah's Apostle retreated, and we
went out with him.
Volume 4, Book 53, Number 325:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(mother of the believers) After the death of Allah 's Apostle Fatima the
daughter of Allah's Apostle asked Abu Bakr As-Siddiq to give her, her share
of inheritance from what Allah's Apostle had left of the Fai (i.e. booty gained
without fighting) which Allah had given him. Abu Bakr said to her, "Allah's
Apostle said, 'Our property will not be inherited, whatever we (i.e.
prophets) leave is Sadaqa (to be used for charity)." Fatima, the daughter of
Allah's Apostle got angry and stopped speaking to Abu Bakr, and continued
assuming that attitude till she died. Fatima remained alive for six months
after the death of Allah's Apostle.
She used to ask Abu Bakr for her share from the property of Allah's Apostle
which he left at Khaibar, and Fadak, and his property at Medina (devoted for
charity). Abu Bakr refused to give her that property and said, "I will not
leave anything Allah's Apostle used to do, because I am afraid that if I left
something from the Prophet's tradition, then I would go astray." (Later on)
Umar gave the Prophet's property (of Sadaqa) at Medina to 'Ali and 'Abbas,
but he withheld the properties of Khaibar and Fadak in his custody and said,
"These two properties are the Sadaqa which Allah's Apostle used to use for
his expenditures and urgent needs. Now their management is to be
entrusted to the ruler." (Az-Zuhrl said, "They have been managed in this way
till today.")

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 326:
Narrated Malik bin Aus:
While I was at home, the sun rose high and it got hot. Suddenly the
messenger of 'Umar bin Al-Khattab came to me and said, "The chief of the
believers has sent for you." So, I went along with him till I entered the place
where 'Umar was sitting on a bedstead made of date-palm leaves and
covered with no mattress, and he was leaning over a leather pillow. I
greeted him and sat down. He said, "O Malik! Some persons of your people
who have families came to me and I have ordered that a gift should be given
to them, so take it and distribute it among them." I said, "O chief of the
believers! I wish that you order someone else to do it." He said, "O man!
Take it." While I was sitting there with him, his doorman Yarfa' came saying,
"'Uthman, 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf, Az-Zubair and Sad bin Abi Waqqas are
asking your permission (to see you); may I admit them?" 'Umar said, "Yes",
So they were admitted and they came in, greeted him, and sat down. After a
while Yarfa' came again and said, "May I admit 'Ali and 'Abbas?" 'Umar said,
"yes." So, they were admitted and they came in and greeted (him) and sat
down. Then 'Abbas said, "O chief of the believers! Judge between me and
this (i.e. 'Ali)." They had a dispute regarding the property of Bani An-Nadir
which Allah had given to His Apostle as Fai. The group (i.e. 'Uthman and his
companions) said, "O chief of the believers! Judge between them and
relieve both of them front each other." 'Umar said, "Be patient! I beseech
you by Allah by Whose Permission the Heaven and the Earth exist, do you
know that Allah's Apostle said, 'Our (i.e. prophets') property will not be
inherited, and whatever we leave, is Sadaqa (to be used for charity),' and
Allah's Apostle meant himself (by saying "we'')?" The group said, "He said
so." 'Umar then turned to 'Ali and 'Abbas and said, "I beseech you by Allah,
do you know that Allah's Apostle said so?" They replied, " He said so." 'Umar
then said, "So, I will talk to you about this matter. Allah bestowed on His
Apostle with a special favor of something of this Fai (booty) which he gave
to nobody else." 'Umar then recited the Holy Verses: "What Allah bestowed
as (Fai) Booty on his Apostle (Muhammad) from them --- for this you made
no expedition with either cavalry or camelry: But Allah gives power to His
Apostles over whomever He will 'And Allah is able to do all things." 9:6)
'Umar added "So this property was especially given to Allah's Apostle, but,
by Allah, neither did he take possession of it and leave your, nor did he favor
himself with it to your exclusion, but he gave it to all of you and distributed
it amongst you till this property remained out of it. Allah's Apostle used to
spend the yearly expenses of his family out of this property and used to
keep the rest of its revenue to be spent on Allah 's Cause. Allah 's Apostle
kept on doing this during all his lifetime. I ask you by Allah do you know
this?" They replies in the affirmative. 'Umar then said to 'Ali and 'Abbas. "I
ask you by Allah, do you know this?" 'Umar added, "When Allah had taken
His Prophet unto Him, 'Abu Bakr said, 'I am the successor of Allah's Apostle
so, Abu Bakr took over that property and managed it in the same way as
Allah's Apostle used to do, and Allah knows that he was true, pious and
rightly-guided, and he was a follower of what was right. Then Allah took Abu
Bakr unto Him and I became Abu Bakr's successor, and I kept that property
in my possession for the first two years of my Caliphate, managing it in the
same way as Allah's Apostle used to do and as Abu Bakr used to do, and
Allah knows that I have been true, pious, rightly guided, and a follower of
what is right. Now you both (i.e. 'Ah and 'Abbas) came to talk to me, bearing
the same claim and presenting the same case; you, 'Abbas, came to me
asking for your share from your nephew's property, and this man, i.e. 'Ali,
came to me asking for his wife's share from her father's property. I told you
both that Allah's Apostle said, 'Our (prophets') properties are not to be
inherited, but what we leave is Sadaqa (to be used for charity).' When I
thought it right that I should hand over this property to you, I said to you, 'I
am ready to hand over this property to you if you wish, on the condition that
you would take Allah's Pledge and Convention that you would manage it in
the same way as Allah's Apostle used to, and as Abu Bakr used to do, and as
I have done since I was in charge of it.' So, both of you said (to me), 'Hand it
over to us,' and on that condition I handed it over to you. So, I ask you by
Allah, did I hand it over to them on this condition?" The group aid, "Yes."
Then 'Umar faced 'Ali and Abbas saying, "I ask you by Allah, did I hand it
over to you on this condition?" They said, "Yes. " He said, " Do you want now
to give a different decision? By Allah, by Whose Leave both the Heaven and
the Earth exist, I will never give any decision other than that (I have already
given). And if you are unable to manage it, then return it to me, and I will do
the job on your behalf."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 327:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The delegates of the tribe of 'Abdul-Qais came and said, "O Allah's Apostle!
We are from the tribe of Rabi'a, and there is the infidels of the tribe of
Mudar intervening between you and us, so we cannot come to you except in
the Sacred Months. So please order us some instructions that we may apply
it to ourselves and also invite our people whom we left behind us to observe
as well." The Prophet said, "I order you (to do) four (things) and forbid you
(to do) four: I order you to believe in Allah, that is, to testify that None has
the right to be worshipped but Allah (the Prophet pointed with his hand); to
offer prayers perfectly; to pay Zakat; to fast the month of Ramadan, and to
pay the Khumus (i.e. one-fifth) of the war booty to Allah and I forbid you to
use Ad-dubba', An-Naqir, Al-Hantam and Al-Muzaffat (i.e. utensils used for
preparing alcoholic drinks)." (See Hadith No. 50, Vol. 1).

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 328:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "My heirs should not take even a single Dinar (i.e.
anything from my property), and whatever I leave, excluding the
expenditure of my wives and my laborers, will be Sadaqa (i.e. be used for
charity)."'

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 329:
Narrated Aisha:
Allah's Apostle died, and there was nothing in my house that a living being
could eat, except some barley Lying on a shelf. So, I ate of it for a long
period and measured it, and (after a short period) it was consumed.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 330:
Narrated 'Amr bin Al-Harith:
The Prophet did not leave anything (after his death) except his arms, a white
mule, and a (piece of) land which he had given as Sadaqa.
Volume 4, Book 53, Number 331:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) When the sickness of Allah's Apostle got
aggravated, he asked the permission of his wives that he should be treated
in my house, and they permitted him.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 332:
Narrated Ibn Abu Mulaika:
'Aisha said, "The Prophet died in my house on the day of my turn while he
was leaning on my chest closer to my neck, and Allah made my saliva mix
with his Saliva." 'Aisha added, "'AbdurRahman came with a Siwak and the
Prophet was too weak to use it so I took it, chewed it and then (gave it to
him and he) cleaned his teeth with it."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 333:
Narrated Safiya:
(the wife of the Prophet) That she came to visit Allah's Apostle while he was
in Itikaf(i.e. seclusion in the Mosque during the last ten days of Ramadan.
When she got up to return, Allah's Apostle got up with her and
accompanied her, and when he reached near the gate of the Mosque close
to the door (of the house) of Um Salama, the wife of the Prophet, two
Ansari men passed by them and greeted Allah's Apostle and then went
away. Allah's Apostle addressed them saying, "Don't hurry! (She is my
wife)," They said, "Glorified be Allah! O Allah's Apostle (You are far away
from any suspicion)," and his saying was hard on them. Allah's Apostle said,
"Satan circulates in the mind of a person as blood does (in his body). I was
afraid that Satan might put some (evil) thoughts in your minds."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 334:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Once I went upstairs in Hafsa's house and saw the Prophet answering the
call of nature with his back towards the Qibla and facing Sham.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 335:
Narrated Aisha:
That Allah's Apostle used to offer the 'Asr prayer while the sun was still
shining in her Hujra (i.e. her dwelling place).

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 336:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet stood up and delivered a sermon, and pointing to 'Aisha's
house (i.e. eastwards), he said thrice, "Affliction (will appear from) here,"
and, "from where the side of the Satan's head comes out (i.e. from the
East)."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 337:
Narrated 'Amra bint Abdur-Rahman:
'Aisha, the wife of the Prophet told her that once Allah's Apostle was with
her and she heard somebody asking permission to enter Hafsa's house. She
said, "O Allah's Apostle! This man is asking permission to enter your house."
Allah's Apostle replied, "I think he is so-and-so (meaning the foster uncle of
Hafsa). What is rendered illegal because of blood relations, is also rendered
illegal because of the corresponding foster-relations."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 338:
Narrated Anas:
That when Abu Bakr became the Caliph, he sent him to Bahrain and wrote
this letter for him, and stamped it with the Ring of the Prophet. Three lines
were engraved on the Ring, (the word) 'Muhammad' was in a line, 'Apostle'
was in another line, and 'Allah' in a third.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 339:
Narrated 'Isa bin Tahman:
Anas brought out to us two worn out leather shoes without hair and with
pieces of leather straps. Later on Thabit Al-Banani told me that Anas said
that they were the shoes of the Prophet.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 340:
Narrated Abu Burda:
'Aisha brought out to us a patched wool Len garment, and she said, "(It
chanced that) the soul of Allah's Apostle was taken away while he was
wearing this." Abu-Burda added, "Aisha brought out to us a thick waist
sheet like the ones made by the Yemenites, and also a garment of the type
called Al-Mulabbada."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 341:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
When the cup of Allah's Apostle got broken, he fixed it with a silver wire at
the crack. (The sub-narrator, 'Asim said, "I saw the cup and drank (water) in
it.")

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 342:
Narrated 'Ali bin Al-Husain:
That when they reached Medina after returning from Yazid bin Mu'awaiya
after the martyrdom of Husain bin 'Ali (may Allah bestow His Mercy upon
him), Al-Miswar bin Makhrama met him and said to him, "Do you have any
need you may order me to satisfy?" 'Ali said, "No." Al-Miswar said, Will you
give me the sword of Allah's Apostle for I am afraid that people may take it
from you by force? By Allah, if you give it to me, they will never be able to
take it till I die." When Ali bin Abu Talib demanded the hand of the daughter
of Abi Jahal to be his wife besides Fatima, I heard Allah's Apostle on his
pulpit delivering a sermon in this connection before the people, and I had
then attained my age of puberty. Allah's Apostle said, "Fatima is from me,
and I am afraid she will be subjected to trials in her religion (because of
jealousy)." The Prophet then mentioned one of his son-in-law who was from
the tribe of 'Abu Shams, and he praised him as a good son-in-law, saying,
"Whatever he said was the truth, and he promised me and fulfilled his
promise. I do not make a legal thing illegal, nor do I make an illegal thing
legal, but by Allah, the daughter of Allah's Apostle and the daughter of the
enemy of Allah, (i.e. Abu Jahl) can never get together (as the wives of one
man) (See Hadith No. 76, Vo. 5).

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 343:
Narrated Ibn Al-Hanafiya:
If Ali had spoken anything bad about 'Uthman then he would have
mentioned the day when some persons came to him and complained about
the Zakat officials of 'Uthman. 'Ali then said to me, "Go to 'Uthman and say
to him, 'This document contains the regulations of spending the Sadaqa of
Allah's Apostle so order your Zakat officials to act accordingly." I took the
document to 'Uthman. 'Uthman said, "Take it away, for we are not in need
of it." I returned to 'Ali with it and informed him of that. He said, "Put it
whence you took it."
Narrated Muhammad bin Suqa: I heard Mundhir At-Tuzi reporting Ibn
Hanafiya who said, "My father sent me saying, 'Take this letter to 'Uthman
for it contains the orders of the Prophet concerning the Sadaqa.' "
Volume 4, Book 53, Number 344:
Narrated 'Ali:
Fatima complained of what she suffered from the hand mill and from
grinding, when she got the news that some slave girls of the booty had been
brought to Allah's Apostle. She went to him to ask for a maid-servant, but
she could not find him, and told 'Aisha of her need. When the Prophet came,
Aisha informed him of that. The Prophet came to our house when we had
gone to our beds. (On seeing the Prophet) we were going to get up, but he
said, 'Keep at your places,' I felt the coolness of the Prophet's feet on my
chest. Then he said, "Shall I tell you a thing which is better than what you
asked me for? When you go to your beds, say: 'Allahu Akbar (i.e. Allah is
Greater)' for 34 times, and 'Alhamdu Lillah (i.e. all the praises are for Allah)'
for 33 times, and Subhan Allah (i.e. Glorified be Allah) for 33 times. This is
better for you than what you have requested."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 345:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah Al-Ansari:
A man amongst us begot a boy whom he named Al-Qasim. On that the
Ansar said, (to the man), "We will never call you Abu-al-Qasim and will never
please you with this blessed title." So, he went to the Prophet and said, "O
Allah's Apostle! I have begotten a boy whom I named Al-Qasim and the
Ansar said, 'We will never call you Abu-al-Qasim, nor will we please you with
this title.' " The Prophet said, "The Ansar have done well. Name by my name,
but do not name by my Kunya, for I am Qasim."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 346:
Narrated Muawiya:
Allah's Apostle said, "If Allah wants to do good for somebody, he makes him
comprehend the Religion (i.e. Islam), and Allah is the Giver and I am Al-
Qasim (i.e. the distributor), and this (Muslim) nation will remain victorious
over their opponents, till Allah's Order comes and they will still be victorious
"
Narrated Abu Huraira: Allah's Apostle said, "Neither do I give you (anything)
nor withhold (anything) from you, but I am just a distributor (i.e. Qasim),
and I give as I am ordered."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 347:
Narrated Khaula Al-Ansariya:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Some people spend Allah's Wealth (i.e.
Muslim's wealth) in an unjust manner; such people will be put in the (Hell)
Fire on the Day of Resurrection."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 348:
Narrated 'Urwa-al-Bariqi:
The Prophet said, "Horses are always the source of good, namely, rewards
(in the Hereafter) and booty, till the Day of Resurrection."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 349:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "When Khosrau is ruined, there will be no Khosrau after
him; and when Caesar is ruined, there will be no Caesar after him. By Him in
Whose Hands my life is, you will spend their treasures in Allah's Cause."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 350:
Narrated Jabir bin Samura:
Allah's Apostle said, "When Khosrau is ruined, there will be no Khosrau after
him; and when Caesar is ruined, their will be no Caesar after him. By Him in
Whose Hands my life is, you will spend their treasures in Allah's Cause."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 351:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "Booty has been made legal for me."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 352:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah guarantees him who strives in His Cause and
whose motivation for going out is nothing but Jihad in His Cause and belief
in His Word, that He will admit him into Paradise (if martyred) or bring him
back to his dwelling place, whence he has come out, with what he gains of
reward and booty."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 353:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "A prophet amongst the prophets carried out a holy
military expedition, so he said to his followers, 'Anyone who has married a
woman and wants to consummate the marriage, and has not done so yet,
should not accompany me; nor should a man who has built a house but has
not completed its roof; nor a man who has sheep or shecamels and is
waiting for the birth of their young ones.' So, the prophet carried out the
expedition and when he reached that town at the time or nearly at the time
of the 'Asr prayer, he said to the sun, 'O sun! You are under Allah's Order
and I am under Allah's Order O Allah! Stop it (i.e. the sun) from setting.' It
was stopped till Allah made him victorious.
Then he collected the booty and the fire came to burn it, but it did not burn
it. He said (to his men), 'Some of you have stolen something from the booty.
So one man from every tribe should give me a pledge of allegiance by
shaking hands with me.' (They did so and) the hand of a man got stuck over
the hand of their prophet. Then that prophet said (to the man), 'The theft
has been committed by your people. So all the persons of your tribe should
give me the pledge of allegiance by shaking hands with me.' The hands of
two or three men got stuck over the hand of their prophet and he said, "You
have committed the theft.' Then they brought a head of gold like the head
of a cow and put it there, and the fire came and consumed the booty. The
Prophet added: Then Allah saw our weakness and disability, so he made
booty legal for us."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 354:
Narrated Aslam:
'Umar said, "Were it not for those Muslims who have not come to existence
yet, I would have distributed (the land of) every town I conquer among the
fighters as the Prophet distributed the land of Khaibar."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 355:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari:
A bedouin asked the Prophet, "A man may fight for the sake of booty, and
another may fight so that he may be mentioned by the people, and a third
may fight to show his position (i.e. bravery); which of these regarded as
fighting in Allah's Cause?" The Prophet said, "He who fights so that Allah's
Word (i.e. Islam) should be superior, fights for Allah's Cause."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 356:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Mulaika:
Some silken cloaks with golden buttons were presented to the Prophet. He
distributed them amongst his companions and kept one for Makhrama, bin
Naufal. Later on Makhrama came along with his son Al-Miswar bin
Makhrama, and stood up at the gate and said (to his son). "Call him (i.e. the
Prophet) to me." The Prophet heard his voice, took a silken cloak and
brought it to him, placing those golden buttons in front of him saying, "O
Abu-al-Miswar! I have kept this aside for you! O Abu-al Miswar! I have kept
this aside for you!" Makhrama was a bad-tempered man.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 357:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
People used to give some of their datepalms to the Prophet (as a gift), till he
conquered Bani Quraiza and Bani An-Nadir, whereupon he started returning
their favors.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 358:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair:
When Az-Zubair got up during the battle of Al-Jamal, he called me and I
stood up beside him, and he said to me, "O my son! Today one will be killed
either as an oppressor or as an oppressed one. I see that I will be killed as an
oppressed one. My biggest worry is my debts. Do you think, if we pay the
debts, there will be something left for us from our money?" Az-Zubair
added, "O my son! Sell our property and pay my debts." Az-Zubair then
willed one-third of his property and willed one-third of that portion to his
sons; namely, 'Abdullah's sons. He said, "One-third of the one third. If any
property is left after the payment of the debts, one-third (of the one-third of
what is left) is to be given to your sons." (Hisham, a sub-narrator added,
"Some of the sons of 'Abdullah were equal in age to the sons of Az-Zubair
e.g. Khubaib and 'Abbas. 'Abdullah had nine sons and nine daughters at that
time." (The narrator 'Abdullah added:) My father (Az-Zubair) went on
drawing my attention to his debts saying, "If you should fail to pay part of
the debts, appeal to my Master to help you." By Allah! I could not
understand what he meant till I asked, "O father! Who is your Master?" He
replied, "Allah (is my Master)." By Allah, whenever I had any difficulty
regarding his debts, I would say, "Master of Az-Zubair! Pay his debts on his
behalf ." and Allah would (help me to) pay it. Az-Zubair was martyred
leaving no Dinar or Dirham but two pieces of land, one of which was (called)
Al-Ghaba, and eleven houses in Medina, two in Basra, one in Kufa and one in
Egypt. In fact, the source of the debt which he owed was, that if somebody
brought some money to deposit with him. Az Zubair would say, "No, (i
won't keep it as a trust), but I take it as a debt, for I am afraid it might be
lost." Az-Zubair was never appointed governor or collector of the tax of
Kharaj or any other similar thing, but he collected his wealth (from the war
booty he gained) during the holy battles he took part in, in the company of
the Prophet, Abu Bakr, 'Umar, and 'Uthman. ('Abdullah bin Az-Zubair
added:) When I counted his debt, it turned to be two million and two
hundred thousand. (The sub-narrator added:) Hakim bin Hizam met
Abdullah bin Zubair and asked, "O my nephew! How much is the debt of my
brother?" 'Abdullah kept it as a secret and said, "One hundred thousand,"
Hakim said, "By Allah! I don't think your property will cover it." On that
'Abdullah said to him, "What if it is two million and two hundred thousand?"
Hakim said, "I don't think you can pay it; so if you are unable to pay all of it, I
will help you." Az-Zubair had already bought Al-Ghaba for one hundred and
seventy thousand. 'Abdullah sold it for one million and six hundred
thousand. Then he called the people saying, "Any person who has any
money claim on Az-Zubair should come to us in Al-Ghaba." There came to
him 'Abdullah bin Ja'far whom Az-Zubair owed four hundred thousand. He
said to 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair, "If you wish I will forgive you the debt."
'Abdullah (bin Az-Zubair) said, "No." Then Ibn Ja'far said, "If you wish you
can defer the payment if you should defer the payment of any debt." Ibn AzZubair said, "No." 'Abdullah bin Ja'far said, "Give me a piece of the land."
'Abdullah bin AzZubair said (to him), "Yours is the land extending from this
place to this place." So, 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair sold some of the property
(including the houses) and paid his debt perfectly, retaining four and a half
shares from the land (i.e. Al-Ghaba). He then went to Mu'awlya while 'Amr
bin 'Uthman, Al-Mundhir bin Az-Zubair and Ibn Zam'a were sitting with him.
Mu'awiya asked, "At what price have you appraised Al-Ghaba?" He said,
"One hundred thousand for each share," Muawiya asked, "How many
shares have been left?" 'Abdullah replied, "Four and a half shares." AlMundhir bin Az-Zubair said, "I would like to buy one share for one hundred
thousand." 'Amr bin 'Uthman said, "I would like to buy one share for one
hundred thousand." Ibn Zam'a said, "I would like to buy one share for one
hundred thousand." Muawiya said, "How much is left now?" 'Abdullah
replied, "One share and a half." Muawiya said, "I would like to buy it for one
hundred and fifty thousand." 'Abdullah also sold his part to Muawiya six
hundred thousand. When Ibn AzZubair had paid all the debts. Az-Zubair's
sons said to him, "Distribute our inheritance among us." He said, "No, by
Allah, I will not distribute it among you till I announce in four successive Hajj
seasons, 'Would those who have money claims on Az-Zubair come so that
we may pay them their debt." So, he started to announce that in public in
every Hajj season, and when four years had elapsed, he distributed the
inheritance among the inheritors. Az-Zubair had four wives, and after the
one-third of his property was excluded (according to the will), each of his
wives received one million and two hundred thousand. So the total amount
of his property was fifty million and two hundred thousand.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 359:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
'Uthman did not join the Badr battle because he was married to one of the
daughters of Allah's Apostle and she was ill. So, the Prophet said to him.
"You will get a reward and a share (from the war booty) similar to the
reward and the share of one who has taken part in the Badr battle."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 360:
Narrated Marwan bin Al-Hakim and Miswar bin Makhrama:
When the Hawazin delegation came to Allah's Apostle after they had
embraced Islam and requested him to return their properties and war
prisoners to them, Allah's Apostle said, "To me the best talk is the truest, so
you may choose either of two things; the war prisoners or the wealth, for I
have delayed their distribution." Allah's Apostle had waited for them for
over ten days when he returned from Ta'if. So, when those people came to
know that Allah's Apostle was not going to return to them except one of
the two things the said, "We choose our war Prisoners 'Allah's Apostle
stood up amongst the Muslims, and after glorifying Allah as He deserved, he
said, "Now then, these brothers of yours have come to us with repentance,
and I see it logical that I should return their captives to them, so whoever of
you likes to do that as a favor then he can do it, and whoever amongst you
likes to stick to his share, let him give up his prisoners and we will
compensate him from the very first Fai' (i.e. war booty received without
fight) which Allah will give us." On that, all the people said. 'O Allah's
Apostles We have agreed willingly to do so (return the captives)" Then
Allah's Apostle said to them "I do not know who amongst you has agreed to
this and who has not. You should return and let your leaders inform me of
your agreement." The people returned and their leaders spoke to them, and
then came to Allah's Apostle and said, "All the people have agreed willingly
to do so and have given the permission to return the war prisoners (without
Compensation)" (Az-Zuhri, the sub-narrator states) This is what has been
related to us about the captives of Hawazin.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 361:
Narrated Zahdam:
Once we were in the house of Abu Musa who presented a meal containing
cooked chicken. A man from the tribe of Bani Taim Allah with red
complexion as if he were from the Byzantine war prisoners, was present.
Abu Musa invited him to share the meal but he (apologised) saying. "I saw
chickens eating dirty things and so I have had a strong aversion to eating
them, and have taken an oath that I will not eat chickens." Abu Musa said,
"Come along, I will tell you about this matter (i.e. how to cancel one's oat ). I
went to the Prophet in the company of a group of Al-Ashariyin, asked him to
provide us with means of conveyance. He said, 'By Allah, I will not provide
you with any means of conveyance and I have nothing to make you ride on.'
Then some camels as booty were brought to Allah's Apostle and he asked
for us saying. 'Where are the group of Al-Ash'ariyun?' Then he ordered that
we should be given five camels with white humps. When we set out we said,
'What have we done? We will never be blessed (with what we have been
given).' So, we returned to the Prophet and said, 'We asked you to provide
us with means of conveyance, but you took an oath that you would not
provide us with any means of conveyance. Did you forget (your oath when
you gave us the camels)? He replied. 'I have not provided you with means of
conveyance, but Allah has provided you with it, and by Allah, Allah willing, if
ever I take an oath to do something, and later on I find that it is more
beneficial to do something different, I will do the thing which is better, and
give expiation for my oath."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 362:
Narrated Nafi from Ibn Umar:
Allah's Apostle sent a Sariya towards Najd, and Abdullah bin 'Umar was in
the Sariya. They gained a great number of camels as war booty. The share of
each one of them was twelve or eleven camels, and they were given an
extra camel each.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 363:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle used to give extra share to some of the members of the
Sariya he used to send, in addition to the shares they shared with the army
in general.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 364:
Narrated Abu Musa:
We got the news of the migration of the Prophet while we were in Yemen,
so we set out migrating to him. We were, I and my two brothers, I being the
youngest, and one of my brothers was Abu Burda and the other was Abu
Ruhm. We were over fifty (or fifty-three or fifty two) men from our people.
We got on board a ship which took us to An-Najashi in Ethiopia, and there
we found Ja'far bin Abu Talib and his companions with An-Najaishi. Ja'far
said (to us), "Allah's Apostle has sent us here and ordered us to stay here, so
you too, stay with us." We stayed with him till we all left (Ethiopia) and met
the Prophet at the time when he had conquered Khaibar. He gave us a share
from its booty (or gave us from its booty). He gave only to those who had
taken part in the Ghazwa with him. but he did not give any share to any
person who had not participated in Khaibar's conquest except the people of
our ship, besides Ja'far and his companions, whom he gave a share as he did
them (i.e. the people of the ship).

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 365:
Narrated Jabir:
Allah's Apostle said (to me), "If the property of Bahrain had come to us, I
would have given you so much and so much." But the Bahrain property did
not come till the Prophet had died. When the Bahrain property came. Abu
Bakr ordered somebody to announce, "Any person who has money claim on
Allah's Apostle or whom Allah's Apostle had promised something, should
come to us." So, I went to him and said, "Allah's Apostle had promised to
give me so much an so much." Abu Bakr scooped up money with both hands
thrice for me." (The sub-narrator Sufyan illustrated this action by scooping
up with both hands and said, "Ibn Munkadir, another sub-narrator, used to
illustrate it in this way.")
Narrated Jabir: Once I went to Abu Bakr and asked for the money but he did
not give me, and I went to him again, but he did not give me, so I went to
him for the third time and said, "I asked you, but you did not give me; then I
asked you (for the second time) and you did not give me; then I asked you
(for the third time) but you did not give me. You should either give me or
allow yourself to be considered a miser regarding my case." Abu Bakr said,
"You tell me that I am a miser with regard to you. But really, whenever I
rejected your request, I had the inclination to give you."
(In another narration Jabir added:) So, Abu Bakr scooped up money with
both hands for me and asked me to count it. I found out that It was five
hundred. Abu Bakr told me to take twice that amount.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 366:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
While Allah's Apostle was distributing the booty at Al-Ja'rana, somebody
said to him "Be just (in your distribution)." The Prophet replied, "Verily I
would be miserable if I did not act justly."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 367:
Narrated Jubair bin Mutim:
The Prophet talked about war prisoners of Badr saying, "Had Al-Mutim bin
Adi been alive and interceded with me for these mean people, I would have
freed them for his sake."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 368:
Narrated Jubair bin Mutim:
I and 'Uthman bin 'Affan went to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's
Apostle! You have given to Bani Al-Muttalib and left us although they and
we are of the same kinship to you." Allah's Apostle said, "Bani Muttalib and
Bani Hashim are one and the same." The Prophet did not give a share to Bani
Abd Shams and Bani Naufai. (Ibn Ishaq said, "Abd Shams and Hashim and AlMuttalib were maternal brothers and their mother was 'Atika bint Murra
and Naufal was their paternal brother.)
Volume 4, Book 53, Number 369:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf:
While I was standing in the row on the day (of the battle) of Badr, I looked
to my right and my left and saw two young Ansari boys, and I wished I had
been stronger than they. One of them called my attention saying, "O Uncle!
Do you know Abu Jahl?" I said, "Yes, What do you want from him, O my
nephew?" He said, "I have been informed that he abuses Allah's Apostle. By
Him in Whose Hands my life is, if I should see him, then my body will not
leave his body till either of us meet his fate." I was astonished at that talk.
Then the other boy called my attention saying the same as the other had
said. After a while I saw Abu Jahl walking amongst the people. I said (to the
boys), "Look! This is the man you asked me about." So, both of them
attacked him with their swords and struck him to death and returned to
Allah'S Apostle to inform him of that. Allah's Apostle asked, "Which of you
has killed him?" Each of them said, "I Have killed him." Allah's Apostle asked,
"Have you cleaned your swords?" They said, "No. " He then looked at their
swords and said, "No doubt, you both have killed him and the spoils of the
deceased will be given to Muadh bin Amr bin Al-Jamuh." The two boys were
Muadh bin 'Afra and Muadh bin Amr bin Al-Jamuh.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 370:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
We set out in the company of Allah's Apostle on the day (of the battle) of
Hunain. When we faced the enemy, the Muslims retreated and I saw a pagan
throwing himself over a Muslim. I turned around and came upon him from
behind and hit him on the shoulder with the sword He (i.e. the pagan) came
towards me and seized me so violently that I felt as if it were death itself,
but death overtook him and he released me. I followed 'Umar bin Al Khattab
and asked (him), "What is wrong with the people (fleeing)?" He replied,
"This is the Will of Allah," After the people returned, the Prophet sat and
said, "Anyone who has killed an enemy and has a proof of that, will posses
his spoils." I got up and said, "Who will be a witness for me?" and then sat
down. The Prophet again said, "Anyone who has killed an enemy and has
proof of that, will possess his spoils." I (again) got up and said, "Who will be
a witness for me?" and sat down. Then the Prophet said the same for the
third time. I again got up, and Allah's Apostle said, "O Abu Qatada! What is
your story?" Then I narrated the whole story to him. A man (got up and)
said, "O Allah's Apostle! He is speaking the truth, and the spoils of the killed
man are with me. So please compensate him on my behalf." On that Abu
Bakr As-Siddiq said, "No, by Allah, he (i.e. Allah's Apostle ) will not agree to
give you the spoils gained by one of Allah's Lions who fights on the behalf of
Allah and His Apostle." The Prophet said, "Abu Bakr has spoken the truth."
So, Allah's Apostle gave the spoils to me. I sold that armor (i.e. the spoils)
and with its price I bought a garden at Bani Salima, and this was my first
property which I gained after my conversion to Islam.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 371:
Narrated Urwa bin Az-Zubair:
Hakim bin Hizam said, "I asked Allah's Apostle for something, and he gave
me. I asked him again, and he gave me, and said to me. 'O Hakim! This
wealth is like green sweet (i.e. fruit), and if one takes it without greed, then
one is blessed in it, and if one takes it with greediness, then one is not
blessed in it, and will be like the one who eats without satisfaction. And an
upper (i.e. giving) hand is better than a lower (i.e. taking) hand,' I said, 'O
Allah's Apostle! By Him Who has sent you with the Truth. I will not ask
anyone for anything after you till I leave this world." So, when Abu Bakr
during his Caliphate, called Hakim to give him (some money), Hakim refused
to accept anything from him. Once 'Umar called him (during his Caliphate) in
order to give him something, but Hakim refused to accept it, whereupon
'Umar said, "O Muslims! I give him (i.e. Haklm) his right which Allah has
assigned to him) from this Fai '(booty), but he refuses to take it." So Haklm
never took anything from anybody after the Prophet till he died.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 372:
Narrated Nafi:
'Umar bin Al-Khattab said, "O Allah's Apostle! I vowed to observe Itikaf for
one day during the Pre-lslamic period." The Prophet ordered him to fulfill his
vow. 'Umar gained two lady captives from the war prisoners of Hunain and
he left them in some of the houses at Mecca. When Allah's Apostle freed the
captives of Hunain without ransom, they came out walking in the streets.
'Umar said (to his son), "O Abdullah! See what is the matter." 'Abdullah
replied, "Allah's Apostle has freed the captives without ransom." He said (to
him), "Go and set free those two slave girls." (Nafi added:) Allah's Apostle
did not perform the 'Umra from Al-Jarana, and if he had performed the
'Umra, it would not have been hidden from 'Abdullah.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 373:
Narrated 'Amr bin Taghlib:
Allah's Apostle gave (gifts) to some people to the exclusion of some others.
The latter seemed to be displeased by that. The Prophet said, "I give to
some people, lest they should deviate from True Faith or lose patience,
while I refer other people to the goodness and contentment which Allah has
put in their hearts, and 'Amr bin Taghlib is amongst them." 'Amr bin Taghlib
said, "The statement of Allah's Apostle is dearer to me than red camels."
Narrated Al-Hasan: 'Amr bin Taghlib told us that Allah's Apostle got some
property or some war prisoners and he distributed them in the above way
(i.e. giving to some people to the exclusion of others) .

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 374:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "I give to Quraish people in order to let them adhere to
Islam, for they are near to their life of Ignorance (i.e. they have newly
embraced Islam and it is still not strong in their hearts."
Volume 4, Book 53, Number 375:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
When Allah favored His Apostle with the properties of Hawazin tribe as Fai
(booty), he started giving to some Quarries men even up to one-hundred
camels each, whereupon some Ansari men said about Allah's Apostle, "May
Allah forgive His Apostle! He is giving to (men of) Quraish and leaves us, in
spite of the fact that our swords are still dropping blood (of the infidels)"
When Allah's Apostle was informed of what they had said, he called the
Ansar and gathered them in a leather tent and did not call anybody else
along, with them. When they gathered, Allah's Apostle came to them and
said, "What is the statement which, I have been informed, and that which
you have said?" The learned ones among them replied," O Allah's Apostle!
The wise ones amongst us did not say anything, but the youngsters amongst
us said, 'May Allah forgive His Apostle; he gives the Quarish and leaves the
Ansar, in spite of the fact that our swords are still dribbling (wet) with the
blood of the infidels.' " Allah's Apostle replied, I give to such people as are
still close to the period of Infidelity (i.e. they have recently embraced Islam
and Faith is still weak in their hearts). Won't you be pleased to see people go
with fortune, while you return with Allah's Apostle to your houses? By Allah,
what you will return with, is better than what they are returning with." The
Ansar replied, "Yes, O Allah's Apostle, we are satisfied' Then the Prophet
said to them." You will find after me, others being preferred to you. Then be
patient till you meet Allah and meet His Apostle at Al-Kauthar (i.e. a fount in
Paradise)." (Anas added:) But we did not remain patient.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 376:
Narrated Jubair bin Mutim:
That while he was with Allah's Apostle who was accompanied by the people
on their way back from Hunain, the bedouins started begging things of
Allah's Apostle so much so that they forced him to go under a Samura tree
where his loose outer garment was snatched away. On that, Allah's Apostle
stood up and said to them, "Return my garment to me. If I had as many
camels as these trees, I would have distributed them amongst you; and you
will not find me a miser or a liar or a coward."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 377:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
While I was walking with the Prophet who was wearing a Najrani outer
garment with a thick hem, a bedouin came upon the Prophet and pulled his
garment so violently that I could recognize the impress of the hem of the
garment on his shoulder, caused by the violence of his pull. Then the
bedouin said, "Order for me something from Allah's Fortune which you
have." The Prophet turned to him and smiled, and ordered that a gift be
given to him.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 378:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
On the day (of the battle) of Hunain, Allah's Apostle favored some people in
the distribution of the booty (to the exclusion of others); he gave Al-Aqra'
bin Habis one-hundred camels and he gave 'Uyaina the same amount, and
also gave to some of the eminent Arabs, giving them preference in this
regard. Then a person came and said, "By Allah, in this distribution justice
has not been observed, nor has Allah's Pleasure been aimed at." I said (to
him), "By Allah, I will inform the Prophet (of what you have said), "I went
and informed him, and he said, "If Allah and His Apostle did not act justly,
who else would act justly. May Allah be merciful to Moses, for he was
harmed with more than this, yet he kept patient."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 379:
Narrated Asma bint Abu Bakr:
I used to carry the date stones on my head from the land of Az-Zubair which
Allah's Apostle had given to him, and it was at a distance of 2/3 of a Farsakh
from my house.
Narrated Hisham's father: The Prophet (gave Az-Zubair a piece of land from
the property of Bani An-Nadir (gained as war booty).

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 380:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Umar bin Al-Khattab expelled all the Jews and Christians from the land of
Hijaz. Allah's Apostle after conquering Khaibar, thought of expelling the
Jews from the land which, after he conquered it belonged to Allah, Allah's
Apostle and the Muslims. But the Jews requested Allah's Apostle to leave
them there on the condition that they would do the labor and get half of the
fruits (the land would yield). Allah's Apostle said, "We shall keep you on
these terms as long as we wish." Thus they stayed till the time of 'Umar's
Caliphate when he expelled them to Taima and Ariha.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 381:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mughaffal:
While we were besieging the fort of Khaibar, a person threw a leather
container containing fat, and I ran to take it, but when I turned I saw the
Prophet (standing behind), so I felt embarrassed in front of him.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 382:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
In our holy battles, we used to get honey and grapes, as war booty which
we would eat and would not store.
Volume 4, Book 53, Number 383:
Narrated Ibn Abi Aufa:
We were afflicted with hunger during the besiege of Khaibar, and when it
was the day of (the battle of) Khaibar, we slaughtered the donkeys and
when the pots got boiling (with their meat). Allah's Apostle made an
announcement that all the pots should be upset and that nobody should eat
anything of the meat of the donkeys. We thought that the Prophet
prohibited that because the Khumus had not been taken out of the booty
(i.e. donkeys); other people said, "He prohibited eating them for ever." The
sub-narrator added, "I asked Said bin Jubair who said, 'He has made the
eating of donkeys' meat illegal for ever.")

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 384:
Narrated 'Umar bin Dinar:
I was sitting with Jabir bin Zaid and 'Amr bin Aus, and Bjalla was narrating to
them in 70 A.H. the year when Musab bin Az-Zubair was the leader of the
pilgrims of Basra. We were sitting at the steps of Zam-zam well and Bajala
said, "I was the clerk of Juz bin Muawiya, Al-Ahnaf's paternal uncle. A letter
came from 'Umar bin Al-Khattab one year before his death; and it was read:-"Cancel every marriage contracted among the Magians between relatives of
close kinship (marriages that are regarded illegal in Islam: a relative of this
sort being called Dhu-Mahram.)" 'Umar did not take the Jizya from the
Magian infidels till 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf testified that Allah's Apostle had
taken the Jizya from the Magians of Hajar.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 385:
Narrated 'Amr bin 'Auf Al-Ansari:
(who was an ally of Bam 'Amr bin Lu'ai and one of those who had taken part
in (the Ghazwa of) Badr): Allah's Apostle sent Abu 'Ubaida bin Al-Jarreh to
Bahrain to collect the Jizya. Allah's Apostle had established peace with the
people of Bahrain and appointed Al-'Ala' bin Al-Hadrami as their governor.
When Abu 'Ubaida came from Bahrain with the money, the Ansar heard of
Abu 'Ubaida's arrival which coincided with the time of the morning prayer
with the Prophet. When Allah's Apostle led them in the morning prayer and
finished, the Ansar approached him, and he looked at them and smiled on
seeing them and said, "I feel that you have heard that Abu. 'Ubaida has
brought something?" They said, "Yes, O Allah's Apostle' He said, "Rejoice
and hope for what will please you! By Allah, I am not afraid of your poverty
but I am afraid that you will lead a life of luxury as past nations did,
whereupon you will compete with each other for it, as they competed for it,
and it will destroy you as it destroyed them."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 386:
Narrated Jubair bin Haiya:
'Umar sent the Muslims to the great countries to fight the pagans. When AlHurmuzan embraced Islam, 'Umar said to him. "I would like to consult you
regarding these countries which I intend to invade." Al-Hurmuzan said, "Yes,
the example of these countries and their inhabitants who are the enemies.
of the Muslims, is like a bird with a head, two wings and two legs; If one of
its wings got broken, it would get up over its two legs, with one wing and
the head; and if the other wing got broken, it would get up with two legs
and a head, but if its head got destroyed, then the two legs, two wings and
the head would become useless. The head stands for Khosrau, and one wing
stands for Caesar and the other wing stands for Faris. So, order the Muslims
to go towards Khosrau." So, 'Umar sent us (to Khosrau) appointing AnNuman bin Muqrin as our commander. When we reached the land of the
enemy, the representative of Khosrau came out with forty-thousand
warriors, and an interpreter got up saying, "Let one of you talk to me!" AlMughira replied, "Ask whatever you wish." The other asked, "Who are you?"
Al-Mughira replied, "We are some people from the Arabs; we led a hard,
miserable, disastrous life: we used to suck the hides and the date stones
from hunger; we used to wear clothes made up of fur of camels and hair of
goats, and to worship trees and stones. While we were in this state, the
Lord of the Heavens and the Earths, Elevated is His Remembrance and
Majestic is His Highness, sent to us from among ourselves a Prophet whose
father and mother are known to us. Our Prophet, the Messenger of our
Lord, has ordered us to fight you till you worship Allah Alone or give Jizya
(i.e. tribute); and our Prophet has informed us that our Lord says:-"Whoever amongst us is killed (i.e. martyred), shall go to Paradise to lead
such a luxurious life as he has never seen, and whoever amongst us remain
alive, shall become your master." (Al-Mughira, then blamed An-Numan for
delaying the attack and) An-Nu' man said to Al-Mughira, "If you had
participated in a similar battle, in the company of Allah's Apostle he would
not have blamed you for waiting, nor would he have disgraced you. But I
accompanied Allah's Apostle in many battles and it was his custom that if he
did not fight early by daytime, he would wait till the wind had started
blowing and the time for the prayer was due (i.e. after midday)."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 387:
Narrated Abu Humaid As-Saidi:
We accompanied the Prophet in the Ghazwa of Tabuk and the king of 'Aila
presented a white mule and a cloak as a gift to the Prophet. And the
Prophet wrote to him a peace treaty allowing him to keep authority over his
country.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 388:
Narrated Juwairiya bin Qudama At-Tamimi:
We said to 'Umar bin Al-Khattab, Jo Chief of the believers! Advise us." He
said, "I advise you to fulfill Allah's Convention (made with the Dhimmis) as it
is the convention of your Prophet and the source of the livelihood of your
dependents (i.e. the taxes from the Dhimmis.) "

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 389:
Narrated Yahya bin Said:
Once the Prophet called the Ansar in order to grant them part of the land of
Bahrain. On that they said, "No! By Allah, we will not accept it unless you
grant a similar thing to our Quarries brothers as well." He said, "That will be
their's if Allah wishes." But when the Ansar persisted in their request, he
said, "After me you will see others given preference over you in this respect
(in which case) you should be patient till you meet me at the Tank (of AlKauthar)."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 390:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle once said to me, "If the revenue of Bahrain came, I would
give you this much and this much." When Allah's Apostle had died, the
revenue of Bahrain came, and Abu Bakr announced, " Let whoever was
promised something by Allah's Apostle come to me." So, I went to Abu Bakr
and said, "Allah's Apostle said to me, 'If the revenue of Bahrain came, I
would give you this much and this. much." On that Abu Bakr said to me,
"Scoop (money) with both your hands." I scooped money with both my
hands and Abu Bakr asked me to count it. I counted it and it was fivehundred (gold pieces). The total amount he gave me was one thousand and
five hundred (gold pieces.)
Narrated Anas: Money from Bahrain was brought to the Prophet . He said,
"Spread it in the Mosque." It was the biggest amount that had ever been
brought to Allah's Apostle . In the meantime Al-'Abbas came to him and
said, "O Allah's Apostle! Give me, for I gave the ransom of myself and Aqil."
The Prophet said (to him), "Take." He scooped money with both hands and
poured it in his garment and tried to lift it, but he could not and appealed to
the Prophet, "Will you order someone to help me in lifting it?" The Prophet
said, "No." Then Al-'Abbas said, "Then will you yourself help me carry it?"
The Prophet said, "No." Then Al 'Abbas threw away some of the money, but
even then he was not able to lift it, and so he gain requested the Prophet
"Will you order someone to help me carry it?" The Prophet said, "No." Then
Al-'Abbas said, "Then will you yourself yelp me carry it?" The Prophet said,
'No." So, Al-'Abbas threw away some more money and lifted it on his
shoulder and went away. The Prophet kept on looking at him with
astonishment at his greediness till he went out of our sight. Allah's Apostle
did not get up from there till not a single Dirham remained from that money.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 391:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
The Prophet said, "Whoever killed a person having a treaty with the
Muslims, shall not smell the smell of Paradise though its smell is perceived
from a distance of forty years."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 392:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
While we were in the Mosque, the Prophet came out and said, "Let us go to
the Jews" We went out till we reached Bait-ul-Midras. He said to them, "If
you embrace Islam, you will be safe. You should know that the earth
belongs to Allah and His Apostle, and I want to expel you from this land. So,
if anyone amongst you owns some property, he is permitted to sell it,
otherwise you should know that the Earth belongs to Allah and His Apostle."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 393:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
that he heard Ibn 'Abbas saying, "Thursday! And you know not what
Thursday is? After that Ibn 'Abbas wept till the stones on the ground were
soaked with his tears. On that I asked Ibn 'Abbas, "What is (about)
Thursday?" He said, "When the condition (i.e. health) of Allah's Apostle
deteriorated, he said, 'Bring me a bone of scapula, so that I may write
something for you after which you will never go astray.'The people differed
in their opinions although it was improper to differ in front of a prophet,
They said, 'What is wrong with him? Do you think he is delirious? Ask him (to
understand). The Prophet replied, 'Leave me as I am in a better state than
what you are asking me to do.' Then the Prophet ordered them to do three
things saying, 'Turn out all the pagans from the Arabian Peninsula, show
respect to all foreign delegates by giving them gifts as I used to do.' " The
sub-narrator added, "The third order was something beneficial which either
Ibn 'Abbas did not mention or he mentioned but I forgot.'

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 394:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
When Khaibar was conquered, a roasted poisoned sheep was presented to
the Prophets as a gift (by the Jews). The Prophet ordered, "Let all the Jews
who have been here, be assembled before me." The Jews were collected
and the Prophet said (to them), "I am going to ask you a question. Will you
tell the truth?'' They said, "Yes.' The Prophet asked, "Who is your father?"
They replied, "So-and-so." He said, "You have told a ie; your father is so-andso." They said, "You are right." He siad, "Will you now tell me the truth, if I
ask you about something?" They replied, "Yes, O AbuAl-Qasim; and if we
should tell a lie, you can realize our lie as you have done regarding our
father." On that he asked, "Who are the people of the (Hell) Fire?" They said,
"We shall remain in the (Hell) Fire for a short period, and after that you will
replace us." The Prophet said, "You may be cursed and humiliated in it! By
Allah, we shall never replace you in it.'' Then he asked, "Will you now tell me
the truth if I ask you a question?" They said, "Yes, O Ab Li-AI-Qasim." He
asked, "Have you poisoned this sheep?" They said, "Yes." He asked, "What
made you do so?" They said, "We wanted to know if you were a liar in which
case we would get rid of you, and if you are a prophet then the poison
would not harm you."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 395:
Narrated 'Asim:
I asked Anas about the Qunut (i.e. invocation in the prayer). Anas said, "It
should be recited before bowing." I said, "So-and-so claims that you say that
it should be recited after bowing." He replied, "He is mistaken." Then Anas
narrated to us that the Prophet invoked evil on the tribe of Bani-Sulaim for
one month after bowing. ' Anas Further said, "The Prophet had sent 40 or
70 Qaris (i.e. men well versed in the knowledge of the Qur'an) to some
pagans, but the latter struggled with them and martyred them, although
there was a peace pact between them and the Prophet I had never seen the
Prophet so sorry and worried about anybody as he was about them (i.e. the
Qaris)."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 396:
Narrated Um Hani:
the daughter of Abu Talib: I went to Allah's Apostle on the day of the
conquest of Mecca and found him taking a bath, and his daughter Fatima
was screening him. I greeted him and he asked, "Who is that?" I said, "I, Um
Hani bint Abi Talib." He said, "Welcome, O Um Hani." When he had finished
his bath, he stood up and offered eight Rakat while dressed in one garment.
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! My brother 'Ali has declared that he will kill a man
to whom I have granted asylum. The man is so and-so bin Hubaira." Allah's
Apostle said, "O Um Hani! We will grant asylum to the one whom you have
granted asylum." (Um Hani said, "That (visit) took place in the Duha (i.e.
forenoon)).

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 397:
Narrated Ibrahim At-Tamimi's father:
'Ali delivered a sermon saying, "We have no book to read except the Book
of Allah and what is written in this paper which contains verdicts regarding
(retaliation for) wounds, the ages of the camels (given as Zakat or as blood
money) and the fact that Medina is a sanctuary in between Air mountain to
so-and-so (mountain). So, whoever innovates in it an heresy or commits a sin
or gives shelter in it, to such an innovator will incur the Curse of Allah, the
angels and all the people, and none of his compulsory or optional good
deeds of worship will be accepted. And whoever (freed slave) takes as his
master (i.e. befriends) other than his real masters will incur the same
(Curse). And the asylum granted by any Muslim is to be secured by all the
other Muslims, and whoever betrays a Muslim in this respect will incur the
same (Curse)."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 398:
Narrated Sahl bin Abi Hathma:
'Abdullah bin Sahl and Muhaiyisa bin Mas'ud bin Zaid set out to Khaibar, the
inhabitants of which had a peace treaty with the Muslims at that time. They
parted and later on Muhaiyisa came upon 'Abdullah bin Sah! and found him
murdered agitating in his blood. He buried him and returned to Medina.
'Abdur Rahman bin Sahl, Muhaiyisa and Huwaiuisa, the sons of Mas'ud came
to the Prophet and 'Abdur Rahman intended to talk, but the Prophet said
(to him), "Let the eldest of you speak." as 'Abdur-Rahman was the
youngest:. 'Abdur-Rahman kept silent and the other two spoke. The Prophet
said, "If you swear as to who has committed the murder, you will have the
right to take your right from the murderer." They said, "How should we
swear if we did not witness the murder or see the murderer?" The Prophet
said, "Then the Jews can clear themselves from the charge by taking Alaska
(an oath taken by men that it was not they who committed the murder)."
The!y said, "How should we believe in the oaths of infidels?" So, the Prophet
himself paid the blood money (of 'Abdullah). (See Hadith No. 36 Vol. 9.)

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 399:
Narrated ' Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
That Abu Sufyan bin Harb Informed him that Heraclius called him and the
members of a caravan from Quraish who had gone to Sham as traders,
during the truce which Allah's Apostle had concluded with Abu Sufyan and
the Quraish infidels.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 400:
Narrated Aisha:
Once the Prophet was bewitched so that he began to imagine that he had
done a thing which in fact he had not done.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 401:
Narrated Auf bin Mali:
I went to the Prophet during the Ghazwa of Tabuk while he was sitting in a
leather tent. He said, "Count six signs that indicate the approach of the
Hour: my death, the conquest of Jerusalem, a plague that will afflict you
(and kill you in great numbers) as the plague that afflicts sheep, the increase
of wealth to such an extent that even if one is given one hundred Dinars, he
will not be satisfied; then an affliction which no Arab house will escape, and
then a truce between you and Bani Al-Asfar (i.e. the Byzantines) who will
betray you and attack you under eighty flags. Under each flag will be twelve
thousand soldiers.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 402:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Abu Bakr, on the day of Nahr (i.e. slaughtering of animals for sacrifice), sent
me in the company of others to make this announcement: "After this year,
no pagan will be allowed to perform the Hajj, and none will be allowed to
perform the Tawaf of the Ka'ba undressed." And the day of Al-Hajj-ul-Akbar
is the day of Nahr, and it called Al-Akbar because the people call the 'Umra
Al-Hajj-ul-Asghar (i.e. the minor Hajj). Abu Bakr threw back the pagans'
covenant that year, and therefore, no pagan performed the Hajj in the year
of Hajj-ul-Wada' of the Prophets.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 403:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever has (the following) four characteristics will
be a pure hypocrite: "If he speaks, he tells a lie; if he gives a promise, he
breaks it, if he makes a covenant he proves treacherous; and if he quarrels,
he behaves in a very imprudent evil insulting manner (unjust). And whoever
has one of these characteristics, has one characteristic of a hypocrite, unless
he gives it us."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 404:
Narrated Ali:
We did not, write anything from the Prophet except the Quran and what is
written in this paper, (wherein) the Prophet said, "Medina is a sanctuary
from (the mountain of) Air to so and-so, therefore, whoever innovates (in it)
an heresy or commits a sin, or gives shelter to such an innovator, will incur
the Curse of Allah. the angels and all the people; and none of his compulsory
or optional good deeds of worship will be accepted And the asylum granted
by any Muslim Is to be secured by all the Muslims even if it is granted by one
of the lowest social status among them. And whoever betrays a Muslim in
this respect will incur the Curse of Allah, the angels and all the people, and
his compulsory and optional good deeds of worship will not be accepted.
And any freed slave will take as masters (befriends) people other than his
own real masters who freed him without taking the permission of the latter,
will incur the Curse of Allah, the angels and all the people, and his
compulsory and optional good deeds of worship will not be accepted."
Narrated Said: Abu Huraira once said (to the people), "What will your state
be when you can get no Dinar or Dirhan (i.e. taxes from the Dhimmis)?" on
that someone asked him, "What makes you know that this state will take
place, O Abu- Hu raira?" He said, "By Him in Whose Hands Abu Huraira's life
is, I know it through the statement of the true and truly inspired one (i.e. the
Prophet)." The people asked, "What does the Statement say?" He replied,
"Allah and His Apostle's asylum granted to Dhimmis, i.e. non-Muslims living
in a Muslim territory) will be outraged, and so Allah will make the hearts of
these Dhimmis so daring that they will refuse to pay the Jizya they will be
supposed to pay."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 405:
Narrated Al-Amash:
I asked Abu Wail, "Did you take part in the battle of Siffin?" He said, 'Yes,
and I heard Sahl bin Hunaif (when he was blamed for lack of zeal for
fighting) saying, "You'd better blame your wrong opinions. I wish you had
seen me on the day of Abu Jandal. If I had the courage to disobey the
Prophet's orders, I would have done so. We had kept out swords on our
necks and shoulders, for a thing which frightened us. And we did so, we
found it easier for us, except in the case of the above battle (of ours).' "

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 406:
Narrated Abu Wail:
We were in Siffin and Sahl bin Hunaif got up and said, "O people! Blame
yourselves! We were with the Prophet on the day of Hudaibiya, and if we
had been called to fight, we would have fought. But 'Umar bin Al Khatab
came and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Aren't we in the right and our opponents
in the wrongs' Allah's Apostle said, 'Yes.' 'Umar said, 'Aren't our killed
persons in Paradise and their's in Hell?' He said, 'Yes.' 'Umar said, 'Then why
should we accept hard terms in matters concerning our religion? Shall we
return before Allah judges between us and them?' Allah's Apostle said, 'O
Ibn Al-Khattab! I am the Apostle of Allah and Allah will never degrade me.
Then 'Umar went to Abu Bakr and told him the same as he had told the
Prophet.
On that Abu Bakr said (to 'Umar). 'He is the Apostle of Allah and Allah will
never degrade him.' Then Surat-al-Fath (i.e. Victory) was revealed and Allah's
Apostle recited it to the end in front of 'Umar. On that 'Umar asked, 'O
Allah's Apostle! Was it (i.e. the Hudaibiya Treaty) a victory?' Allah's Apostle
said, "Yes"

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 407:
Narrated Asma 'bint Abi Bakr:
During the period of the peace treaty of Quraish with Allah's Apostle, my
mother, accompanied by her father, came to visit me, and she was a pagan. I
consulted Allah's Apostle, "O Allah's Apostle! My mother has come to me
and she desires to receive a reward from me, shall I keep good relation with
her?" He said, "Yes, keep good relation with her."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 408:
Narrated Al-Bara:
When the Prophet intended to perform the 'Umra he sent a person to the
people of Mecca asking their permission to enter Mecca. They stipulated
that he would not stay for more than three days and would not enter it
except with sheathed arms and would not preach (Islam) to any of them. So
Ali bin Abi-Talib started writing the treaty between them. He wrote, "This is
what Muhammad, Apostle of Allah has agreed to." The (Meccans) said, "If
we knew that you (Muhammad) are the Apostle of Allah, then we would not
have prevented you and would have followed you. But write, 'This is what
Muhammad bin 'Abdullah has agreed to..' " On that Allah's Apostle said, "By
Allah, I am Muhammad bin 'Abdullah, and, by Allah, I am Apostle of 'Allah."
Allah's Apostle used not to write; so he asked 'Ali to erase the expression of
Apostle of Allah. On that 'Ali said, "By Allah I will never erase it." Allah's
Apostle said (to 'Ali), "Let me see the paper." When 'Ali showed him the
paper, the Prophet erased the expression with his own hand. When Allah's
Apostle had entered Mecca and three days had elapsed, the Meccans came
to 'Ali and said, "Let your friend (i.e. the Prophet) quit Mecca." Ali informed
Allah's Apostle about it and Allah's Apostle said, "Yes," and then he
departed.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 409:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
While the Prophet was in the state of prostration, surrounded by a group of
people from Quraish pagans. 'Uqba bin Abi Mu'ait came and brought the
intestines of a camel and threw them on the back of the Prophet . The
Prophet did not raise his head from prostration till Fatima (i.e. his daughter)
came and removed those intestines from his back, and invoked evil on
whoever had done (the evil deed). The Prophet said, "O Allah! Destroy the
chiefs of Quraish, O Allah! Destroy Abu Jahl bin Hisham, 'Utba bin Rabi'a,
Shaiba bin Rabi'a. 'Uqba bin Abi Mu'ait 'Umaiya bin Khalaf (or Ubai bin
Kalaf)." Later on I saw all of them killed during the battle of Badr and their
bodies were thrown into a well except the body of Umaiya or Ubai, because
he was a fat person, and when he was pulled, the parts of his body got
separated before he was thrown into the well.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 410:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, ''Every betrayer will have a flag on the Day of
Resurrection" One of the two sub-narrators said that the flag would be
fixed, and the other said that it would be shown on the Day of Resurrection,
so that the betrayer might be recognized by it.

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 411:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
The Prophet said, "Every betrayer will have a flag which will be fixed on the
Day of Resurrection, and the flag's prominence will be made in order to
show the betrayal he committed."

Volume 4, Book 53, Number 412:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle said on the day of the conquest of Mecca, "There is no
migration now, but there is Jihad (i.e.. holy battle) and good intentions. And
when you are called for Jihad, you should come out at once" Allah's Apostle
also said, on the day of the conquest of Mecca, "Allah has made this town a
sanctuary since the day He created the Heavens and the Earth. So, it is a
sanctuary by Allah's Decree till the Day of Resurrection. Fighting in it was
not legal for anyone before me, and it was made legal for me only for an
hour by daytime. So, it (i.e. Mecca) is a sanctuary by Allah's Decree till the
Day of Resurrection. Its thorny bushes should not be cut, and its game
should not be chased, its fallen property (i.e. Luqata) should not be picked
up except by one who will announce it publicly; and its grass should not be
uprooted," On that Al-'Abbas said, "O Allah's Apostle! Except the Idhkhir,
because it is used by the goldsmiths and by the people for their houses." On
that the Prophet said, "Except the Idhkhir."
BOOK 54. BEGINNING OF CREATION (413-542)
Volume 4, Book 54, Number 413:
Narrated 'Imran bin Husain:
Some people of Bani Tamim came to the Prophet and he said (to them), "O
Bani Tamim! rejoice with glad tidings." They said, "You have given us glad
tidings, now give us something." On hearing that the color of his face
changed then the people of Yemen came to him and he said, "O people of
Yemen ! Accept the good tidings, as Bani Tamim has refused them." The
Yemenites said, "We accept them. Then the Prophet started taking about
the beginning of creation and about Allah's Throne. In the mean time a man
came saying, "O 'Imran! Your she-camel has run away!'' (I got up and went
away), but l wish I had not left that place (for I missed what Allah's Apostle
had said).

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 414:
Narrated Imran bin Husain:
I went to the Prophet and tied my she-camel at the gate. The people of Bani
Tamim came to the Prophet who said "O Bani Tamim! Accept the good
tidings." They said twice, 'You have given us the good tidings, now give us
something" Then some Yemenites came to him and he said, "Accept the
good tidings, O people of Yemem, for Bani Tamim refused them." They said,
"We accept it, O Allah's Apostle! We have come to ask you about this matter
(i.e. the start of creations)." He said, "First of all, there was nothing but
Allah, and (then He created His Throne). His throne was over the water, and
He wrote everything in the Book (in the Heaven) and created the Heavens
and the Earth." Then a man shouted, "O Ibn Husain! Your she-camel has
gone away!" So, I went away and could not see the she-camel because of
the mirage. By Allah, I wished I had left that she-camel (but not that
gathering).
Narrated 'Umar: One day the Prophet stood up amongst us for a long period
and informed us about the beginning of creation (and talked about
everything in detail) till he mentioned how the people of Paradise will enter
their places and the people of Hell will enter their places. Some remembered
what he had said, and some forgot it.

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 415:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah the Most Superior said, "The son of Adam slights
Me, and he should not slight Me, and he disbelieves in Me, and he ought not
to do so. As for his slighting Me, it is that he says that I have a son; and his
disbelief in Me is his statement that I shall not recreate him as I have created
(him) before."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 416:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "When Allah completed the creation, He wrote in His
Book which is with Him on His Throne, "My Mercy overpowers My Anger."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 417:
Narrated Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Al-Harith:
from Abu Salama bin 'Abdur-Rahman who had a dispute with some people
on a piece of land, and so he went to 'Aisha and told her about it. She said,
"O Abu Salama, avoid the land, for Allah's Apostle said, 'Any person who
takes even a span of land unjustly, his neck shall be encircled with it down
seven earths.' "

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 418:
Narrated Salim's father:
The Prophet said, "Any person who takes a piece of land unjustly will sink
down the seven earths on the Day of Resurrection."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 419:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
The Prophet said. "(The division of time has turned to its original form which
was current when Allah created the Heavens and the Earths. The year is of
twelve months, out of which four months are sacred: Three are in
succession Dhul-Qa' da, Dhul-Hijja and Muharram, and (the fourth is) Rajab
of (the tribe of) Mudar which comes between Jumadi-ath-Thaniyah and Sha
ban."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 420:
Narrated Said bin Zaid bin Amr bin Nufail:
That Arwa sued him before Marwan for a right, which she claimed, he had
deprived her of. On that Said said, "How should I deprive her of her right? I
testify that I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'If anyone takes a span of land
unjustly, his neck will be encircled with it down seven earths on the Day of
Resurrection."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 421:
Narrated Abu Dhar:
The Prophet asked me at sunset, "Do you know where the sun goes (at the
time of sunset)?" I replied, "Allah and His Apostle know better." He said, "It
goes (i.e. travels) till it prostrates Itself underneath the Throne and takes the
permission to rise again, and it is permitted and then (a time will come
when) it will be about to prostrate itself but its prostration will not be
accepted, and it will ask permission to go on its course but it will not be
permitted, but it will be ordered to return whence it has come and so it will
rise in the west. And that is the interpretation of the Statement of Allah:
"And the sun Runs its fixed course For a term (decreed). that is The Decree
of (Allah) The Exalted in Might, The All-Knowing." (36.38)

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 422:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The sun and the moon will be folded up (deprived of
their light) on the Day of Resurrection."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 423:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "The sun and the moon do not eclipse because of
someone's death or wife (i.e. birth), but they are two signs amongst the
Signs of Allah. So, if you see them (i.e. eclipse) offer the Prayer (of eclipse)."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 424:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "The sun and the moon are two signs amongst the Signs
of Allah. They do not eclipse because of someone's death or life. So, if you
see them (i.e. eclipse), celebrate the Praises of Allah (i.e. pray)."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 425:
Narrated 'Aisha:
On the day of a solar eclipse, Allah's Apostle stood up (to offer the eclipse
prayer). He recited Takbir, recited a long recitation (of Holy Verses), bowed
a long bowing, and then he raised h is head saying. "Allah hears him who
sends his praises to Him." Then he stayed standing, recited a long recitation
again, but shorter than the former, bowed a long bowing, but shorter than
the first, performed a long prostration and then performed the second
Rak'a in the same way as he had done the first. By the time he had finished
his prayer with Taslim, the solar eclipse had been over. Then he addressed
the people referring to the solar and lunar eclipses saying, "These are two
signs amongst the Signs of Allah, and they do not eclipse because of
anyone's death or life. So, if you see them, hasten for the Prayer."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 426:
Narrated Abu Mas'ud:
The Prophet said, "the sun and the moon do not eclipse because of the
death or life of someone, but they are two signs amongst the Signs of Allah.
So, if you see them, offer the Prayer (of eclipse)."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 427:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "I have been made victorious with the Saba (i.e. easterly
wind) and the people of 'Ad were destroyed with the Dabur (i.e. westerly
wind) ."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 428:
Narrated Ata:
'Aisha said If the Prophet saw a cloud In the sky, he would walk to and fro in
agitation, go out and come in, and the color of his face would change, and if
it rained, he would feel relaxed." So 'Aisha knew that state of his. So the
Prophet said, I don't know (am afraid), it may be similar to what happened
to some people referred to in the Holy Quran in the following Verse: -- "Then
when they saw it as a dense cloud coming towards their valleys, they said,
'This is a cloud bringing us rain!' Nay, but, it is that (torment) which you were
asking to be hastened a wind wherein is severe torment." (46.24)

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 429:
Narrated Malik bin Sasaa:
The Prophet said, "While I was at the House in a state midway between
sleep and wakefulness, (an angel recognized me) as the man lying between
two men. A golden tray full of wisdom and belief was brought to me and my
body was cut open from the throat to the lower part of the abdomen and
then my abdomen was washed with Zam-zam water and (my heart was)
filled with wisdom and belief. Al-Buraq, a white animal, smaller than a mule
and bigger than a donkey was brought to me and I set out with Gabriel.
When I reached the nearest heaven. Gabriel said to the heaven gate-keeper,
'Open the gate.' The gatekeeper asked, 'Who is it?' He said, 'Gabriel.' The
gate-keeper,' Who is accompanying you?' Gabriel said, 'Muhammad.' The
gate-keeper said, 'Has he been called?' Gabriel said, 'Yes.' Then it was said,
'He is welcomed. What a wonderful visit his is!' Then I met Adam and
greeted him and he said, 'You are welcomed O son and a Prophet.' Then we
ascended to the second heaven. It was asked, 'Who is it?' Gabriel said,
'Gabriel.' It was said, 'Who is with you?' He said, 'Muhammad' It was asked,
'Has he been sent for?' He said, 'Yes.' It was said, 'He is welcomed. What a
wonderful visit his is!" Then I met Jesus and Yahya (John) who said, 'You are
welcomed, O brother and a Prophet.' Then we ascended to the third
heaven. It was asked, 'Who is it?' Gabriel said, 'Gabriel.' It was asked, 'Who is
with you? Gabriel said, 'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has he been sent for?'
'Yes,' said Gabriel. 'He is welcomed. What a wonderful visit his is!' (The
Prophet added:). There I met Joseph and greeted him, and he replied, 'You
are welcomed, O brother and a Prophet!' Then we ascended to the 4th
heaven and again the same questions and answers were exchanged as in
the previous heavens. There I met Idris and greeted him. He said, 'You are
welcomed O brother and Prophet.' Then we ascended to the 5th heaven
and again the same questions and answers were exchanged as in previous
heavens. there I met and greeted Aaron who said, 'You are welcomed O
brother and a Prophet". Then we ascended to the 6th heaven and again the
same questions and answers were exchanged as in the previous heavens.
There I met and greeted Moses who said, 'You are welcomed O brother and.
a Prophet.' When I proceeded on, he started weeping and on being asked
why he was weeping, he said, 'O Lord! Followers of this youth who was sent
after me will enter Paradise in greater number than my followers.' Then we
ascended to the seventh heaven and again the same questions and answers
were exchanged as in the previous heavens. There I met and greeted
Abraham who said, 'You are welcomed o son and a Prophet.' Then I was
shown Al-Bait-al-Ma'mur (i.e. Allah's House). I asked Gabriel about it and he
said, This is Al Bait-ul-Ma'mur where 70,000 angels perform prayers daily
and when they leave they never return to it (but always a fresh batch comes
into it daily).' Then I was shown Sidrat-ul-Muntaha (i.e. a tree in the seventh
heaven) and I saw its Nabk fruits which resembled the clay jugs of Hajr (i.e. a
town in Arabia), and its leaves were like the ears of elephants, and four
rivers originated at its root, two of them were apparent and two were
hidden. I asked Gabriel about those rivers and he said, 'The two hidden
rivers are in Paradise, and the apparent ones are the Nile and the Euphrates.'
Then fifty prayers were enjoined on me. I descended till I met Moses who
asked me, 'What have you done?' I said, 'Fifty prayers have been enjoined on
me.' He said, 'I know the people better than you, because I had the hardest
experience to bring Bani Israel to obedience. Your followers cannot put up
with such obligation. So, return to your Lord and request Him (to reduce the
number of prayers.' I returned and requested Allah (for reduction) and He
made it forty. I returned and (met Moses) and had a similar discussion, and
then returned again to Allah for reduction and He made it thirty, then
twenty, then ten, and then I came to Moses who repeated the same advice.
Ultimately Allah reduced it to five. When I came to Moses again, he said,
'What have you done?' I said, 'Allah has made it five only.' He repeated the
same advice but I said that I surrendered (to Allah's Final Order)'" Allah's
Apostle was addressed by Allah, "I have decreed My Obligation and have
reduced the burden on My slaves, and I shall reward a single good deed as if
it were ten good deeds."
Volume 4, Book 54, Number 430:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mus'ud:
Allah's Apostle, the true and truly inspired said, "(The matter of the Creation
of) a human being is put together in the womb of the mother in forty days,
and then he becomes a clot of thick blood for a similar period, and then a
piece of flesh for a similar period. Then Allah sends an angel who is ordered
to write four things. He is ordered to write down his (i.e. the new creature's)
deeds, his livelihood, his (date of) death, and whether he will be blessed or
wretched (in religion). Then the soul is breathed into him. So, a man
amongst you may do (good deeds till there is only a cubit between him and
Paradise and then what has been written for him decides his behavior and
he starts doing (evil) deeds characteristic of the people of the (Hell) Fire.
And similarly a man amongst you may do (evil) deeds till there is only a cubit
between him and the (Hell) Fire, and then what has been written for him
decides his behavior, and he starts doing deeds characteristic of the people
of Paradise."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 431:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "If Allah loves a person, He calls Gabriel saying, 'Allah
loves so and-so; O Gabriel! Love him.' Gabriel would love him and make an
announcement amongst the inhabitants of the Heaven. 'Allah loves so-andso, therefore you should love him also,' and so all the inhabitants of the
Heaven would love him, and then he is granted the pleasure of the people
on the earth."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 432:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "The angels descend, the clouds and mention
this or that matter decreed in the Heaven. The devils listen stealthily to such
a matter, come down to inspire the soothsayers with it, and the latter would
add to it one-hundred lies of their own."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 433:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "On every Friday the angels take heir stand at every gate
of the mosques to write the names of the people chronologically (i.e.
according to the time of their arrival for the Friday prayer and when the
Imam sits (on the pulpit) they fold up their scrolls and get ready to listen to
the sermon."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 434:
Narrated Sa'id bin Al-Musaiyab:
'Umar came to the Mosque while Hassan was reciting a poem. ('Umar
disapproved of that). On that Hassan said, "I used to recite poetry in this
very Mosque in the presence of one (i.e. the Prophet ) who was better than
you." Then he turned towards Abu Huraira and said (to him), "I ask you by
Allah, did you hear Allah's Apostle saying (to me), "Retort on my behalf. O
Allah! Support him (i.e. Hassan) with the Holy Spirit?" Abu Huraira said,
"Yes."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 435:
Narrated Al Bara:
The Prophet said to Hassan, "Lampoon them (i.e. the pagans) and Gabriel is
with you."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 436:
Narrated Jarir
as below (Hadith 437).

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 437:
Narrated Humaid bin Hilal:
Anas bin Malik said, "As if I say a cloud of dust swirling up in the lane of Bani
Ghanim." Musa added, "That was caused by the procession of Gabriel."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 438:
Narrated Aisha:
Al Harith bin Hisham asked the Prophet, "How does the divine inspiration
come to you?" He replied, "In all these ways: The Angel sometimes comes to
me with a voice which resembles the sound of a ringing bell, and when this
state abandons me, I remember what the Angel has said, and this type of
Divine Inspiration is the hardest on me; and sometimes the Angel comes to
me in the shape of a man and talks to me, and I understand and remember
what he says."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 439:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Who ever spends a couple (of objects) in Allah's
cause, will be called by the Gatekeepers of Paradise who will say, "O so-andso, come on!" Abu Bakr said, "Such a person will never perish or be
miserable' The Prophet said, "I hope you will be among such person."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 440:
Narrated Abu Salama:
'Aisha said that the Prophet said to her "O 'Aisha' This is Gabriel and he
sends his (greetings) salutations to you." 'Aisha said, "Salutations
(Greetings) to him, and Allah's Mercy and Blessings be on him," and
addressing the Prophet she said, "You see what I don't see."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 441:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Allah's Apostle asked Gabriel, "Why don't you visit us more often than you
do?" Then the following Holy Verse was revealed (in this respect):-- "And we
(angels) descend not but by the order of your Lord. To Him belong what is
before us and what is behind us, and what is between those two and your
Lord was never forgetful." (19.64)

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 442:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Allah's Apostle said, "Gabriel read the Qur'an to me in one way (i.e. dialect)
and I continued asking him to read it in different ways till he read it in seven
different ways."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 443:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle was the most generous of all the people, and he used to be
more generous in the month of Ramadan when Gabriel used to meet him.
Gabriel used to meet him every night in Ramadan to study the Holy Quran
carefully together. Allah's Apostle used to become more generous than the
fast wind when he met Gabriel

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 444:
Narrated Ibn Shihab:
Once Umar bin Abdul Aziz delayed the 'Asr prayer a little. 'Urwa said to him,
"Gabriel descended and led the prayer in front of the Prophet " On that
'Umar said, "O Urwa! Be sure of what you say." "Urwa, "I heard Bashir bin
Abi Masud narrating from Ibn Masud who heard Allah's Apostle saying,
'Gabriel descended and led me in prayer; and then prayed with him again,
and then prayed with him again, and then prayed with him again, and then
prayed with him again, counting with his fingers five prayers."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 445:
Narrated Abu Dhar:
The Prophet said, "Gabriel said to me, 'Whoever amongst your followers die
without having worshipped others besides Allah, will enter Paradise (or will
not enter the (Hell) Fire)." The Prophet asked. "Even if he has committed
illegal sexual intercourse or theft?" He replied, "Even then."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 446:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Angels keep on descending from and ascending to the
Heaven in turn, some at night and some by daytime, and all of them
assemble together at the time of the Fajr and 'Asr prayers. Then those who
have stayed with you over-night, ascent unto Allah Who asks them, and He
knows the answer better than they, "How have you left My slaves?" They
reply, "We have left them praying as we found them praying." If anyone of
you says "Amin" (during the Prayer at the end of the recitation of Surat-alFaitiha), and the angels in Heaven say the same, and the two sayings
coincide, all his past sins will be forgiven."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 447:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I stuffed for the Prophet a pillow decorated with pictures (of animals) which
looked like a Namruqa (i.e. a small cushion). He came and stood among the
people with excitement apparent on his face. I said, "O Allah's Apostle!
What is wrong?" He said, "What is this pillow?" I said, "I have prepared this
pillow for you, so that you may recline on it." He said, "Don't you know that
angels do not enter a house wherein there are pictures; and whoever makes
a picture will be punished on the Day of Resurrection and will be asked to
give life to (what he has created)?"

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 448:
Narrated Abu Talha:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying; "Angels (of Mercy) do not enter a house
wherein there is a dog or a picture of a living creature (a human being or an
animal)."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 449:
Narrated Busr bin Said:
That Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani narrated to him something in the presence of
Said bin 'Ubaidullah Al-Khaulani who was brought up in the house of
Maimuna the wife of the Prophet. Zaid narrated to them that Abu Talha said
that the Prophet said, "The Angels (of Mercy) do not enter a house wherein
there is a picture." Busr said, "Later on Zaid bin Khalid fell ill and we called
on him. To our surprise we saw a curtain decorated with pictures in his
house. I said to Ubaidullah Al-Khaulani, "Didn't he (i.e. Zaid) tell us about the
(prohibition of) pictures?" He said, "But he excepted the embroidery on
garments. Didn't you hear him?" I said, "No." He said, "Yes, he did."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 450:
Narrated Salim's father:
Once Gabriel promised the Prophet (that he would visit him, but Gabriel did
not come) and later on he said, "We, angels, do not enter a house which
contains a picture or a dog."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 451:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "When the Imam, during the prayer, says, "Allah hears
him who praises Him', say: 'O Allah! Our Lord! All the praises are for You/, for
if the saying of anyone of you coincides with the saying of the angels, his
past sins will be forgiven."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 452:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "As long as any-one of you is waiting for the prayer, he is
considered to be praying actually, and the angels say, 'O Allah! Be merciful
to him and forgive him', (and go on saying so) unless he leaves his place of
praying or passes wind (i.e. breaks his ablution)."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 453:
Narrated Yali:
I heard the Prophet reciting the following Verse on the pulpit: "They will call:
O Mali......' and Sufyan said that 'Abdullah recited it: 'They will call: O Mali..'
(43.77)

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 454:
Narrated 'Aisha:
That she asked the Prophet , 'Have you encountered a day harder than the
day of the battle) of Uhud?" The Prophet replied, "Your tribes have troubled
me a lot, and the worse trouble was the trouble on the day of 'Aqaba when I
presented myself to Ibn 'Abd-Yalail bin 'Abd-Kulal and he did not respond to
my demand. So I departed, overwhelmed with excessive sorrow, and
proceeded on, and could not relax till I found myself at Qarnath-Tha-alib
where I lifted my head towards the sky to see a cloud shading me
unexpectedly. I looked up and saw Gabriel in it. He called me saying, 'Allah
has heard your people's saying to you, and what they have replied back to
you, Allah has sent the Angel of the Mountains to you so that you may order
him to do whatever you wish to these people.' The Angel of the Mountains
called and greeted me, and then said, "O Muhammad! Order what you wish.
If you like, I will let Al-Akh-Shabain (i.e. two mountains) fall on them." The
Prophet said, "No but I hope that Allah will let them beget children who will
worship Allah Alone, and will worship None besides Him."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 455:
Narrated Abu Ishaq-Ash-Shaibani:
I asked Zir bin Hubaish regarding the Statement of Allah: "And was at a
distance Of but two bow-lengths Or (even) nearer; So did (Allah) convey The
Inspiration to His slave (Gabriel) and then he (Gabriel) Conveyed (that to
Muhammad). (53.9-10) On that, Zir said, "Ibn Mas'ud informed us that the
Prophet had seen Gabriel having 600 wings."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 456:
Narrated Abdullah:
Regarding the Verse: "Indeed he (Muhammad) did see. Of the Signs of his
Lord, The Greatest!" (53.18) That the Prophet had seen a green carpet
spread all over the horizon of the sky.
Volume 4, Book 54, Number 457:
Narrated Aisha:
Whoever claimed that (the Prophet) Muhammad saw his Lord, is
committing a great fault, for he only saw Gabriel in his genuine shape in
which he was created covering the whole horizon.

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 458:
Narrated Masruq:
I asked Aisha "What about His Statement:-- "Then he (Gabriel) approached
And came closer, And was at a distance Of but two bow-lengths Or (even)
nearer?" (53.8-9) She replied, "It was Gabriel who used to come to the
Prophet in the figure of a man, but on that occasion, he came in his actual
and real figure and (he was so huge) that he covered the whole horizon."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 459:
Narrated Samura:
The Prophet said, "Last night I saw (in a dream) two men coming to me. One
of them said, "The person who kindles the fire is Malik, the gate-keeper of
the (Hell) Fire, and I am Gabriel, and this is Michael."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 460:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If a husband calls his wife to his bed (i.e. to have sexual
relation) and she refuses and causes him to sleep in anger, the angels will
curse her till morning."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 461:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
that he heard the Prophet saying, "The Divine Inspiration was delayed for a
short period but suddenly, as I was walking. I heard a voice in the sky, and
when I looked up towards the sky, to my surprise, I saw the angel who had
come to me in the Hira Cave, and he was sitting on a chair in between the
sky and the earth. I was so frightened by him that I fell on the ground and
came to my family and said (to them), 'Cover me! (with a blanket), cover
me!' Then Allah sent the Revelation: "O, You wrapped up (In a blanket)!
(Arise and warn! And your Lord magnify And keep pure your garments, And
desert the idols." (74.1-5)

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 462:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet said, "On the night of my Ascent to the Heaven, I saw Moses
who was a tall brown curly-haired man as if he was one of the men of
Shan'awa tribe, and I saw Jesus, a man of medium height and moderate
complexion inclined to the red and white colors and of lank hair. I also saw
Malik, the gate-keeper of the (Hell) Fire and Ad-Dajjal amongst the signs
which Allah showed me." (The Prophet then recited the Holy Verse): "So be
not you in doubt of meeting him' when you met Moses during the night of
Mi'raj over the heavens" (32.23)
Narrated Anas and Abu Bakra: "The Prophet said, "The angels will guard
Medina from Ad-Dajjal (who will not be able to enter the city of Medina)."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 463:
Narrated Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "When anyone of you dies, he will be shown his
destination both in the morning and in the evening, and if he belongs to the
people of Paradise, he will be shown his place in Paradise, and if he is from
the people of Hell, he will be shown his place in Hell."
Volume 4, Book 54, Number 464:
Narrated 'Imran bin Husain:
The Prophet said, "I looked at Paradise and found poor people forming the
majority of its inhabitants; and I looked at Hell and saw that the majority of
its inhabitants were women."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 465:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
While we were in the company of the Prophet, he said, "While I was asleep, I
saw myself in Paradise and there I beheld a woman making ablution beside a
palace, I asked, To whom does this palace belong? 'They said, To 'Umar bin
Al-Khattab.' Then I remembered 'Umar's Ghaira (concerning women), and
so I quickly went away from that palace." (When 'Umar heard this from the
Prophet), he wept and said, "Do you think it is likely that I feel Ghaira
because of you, O Allah's Apostle?"

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 466:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Qais Al-Ashari:
The Prophet said, "A tent (in Paradise) is like a hollow pearl which is thirty
miles in height and on every corner of the tent the believer will have a family
that cannot be seen by the others." (Narrated Abu Imran in another
narration, "(The tent is) sixty miles (in height)")

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 467:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah said, "I have prepared for My Pious slaves things
which have never been seen by an eye, or heard by an ear, or imagined by 
human being." If you wish, you can recite this Verse from the Holy Quran:-"No soul knows what is kept hidden for them, of joy as a reward for what
they used to do." (32.17)

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 468:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The first group (of people) who will enter Paradise will
be (glittering) like the moon when it is full. They will not spit or blow their
noses or relieve nature. Their utensils will be of gold and their combs of gold
and silver; in their centers the aloe wood will be used, and their sweat will
smell like musk. Everyone of them will have two wives; the marrow of the
bones of the wives' legs will be seen through the flesh out of excessive
beauty. They ( i.e. the people of Paradise) will neither have differences nor
hatred amongst themselves; their hearts will be as if one heart and they will
be glorifying Allah in the morning and in the evening."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 469:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The first batch (of people) who will enter Paradise will
be (glittering) like a full moon; and those who will enter next will be
(glittering) like the brightest star. Their hearts will be as if the heart of a
single man, for they will have no enmity amongst themselves, and everyone
of them shall have two wives, each of whom will be so beautiful, pure and
transparent that the marrow of the bones of their legs will be seen through
the flesh. They will be glorifying Allah in the morning and evening, and will
never fall ill, and they will neither blow their noses, nor spit. Their utensils
will be of gold and silver, and their combs will be of gold, and the fuel used
in their centers will be the aloes-wood, and their sweat will smell like musk."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 470:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
The Prophet said, "Verily! 70,000 or 700,000 of my followers will enter
Paradise altogether; so that the first and the last amongst them will enter at
the same time, and their faces will be glittering like the bright full moon."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 471:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
A silken cloak was presented to the Prophet and he used to forbid the usage
of silk (by men). When the people were fascinated by the cloak. he said, "By
Allah in Whose Hands the life of Muhammad is, the handkerchiefs of Sad bin
Mu'adh in Paradise are better than this."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 472:
Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib:
Allah's Apostle was given a silken garment, and its beauty and delicacy
astonished the people. On that, Allah's Apostle said, "No doubt, the
handkerchiefs of Sad bin Muadh in Paradise are better than this."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 473:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad Al-Saidi:
Allah's Apostle said, "A place in Paradise equal to the size of a lash is better
than the whole world and whatever is in it."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 474:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "There is a tree in Paradise (which is so big and huge that)
if a rider travels in its shade for one hundred years, he would not be able to
cross it."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 475:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said "There is a tree in Paradise (which is so big and huge that)
a rider could travel in its shade for a hundred years. And if you wish, you can
recite:--'In shade long extended..' (56. 30) and a place in Paradise equal to an
arrow bow of one of you, is better than (the whole earth) on which the sun
rises and sets."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 476:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The first batch (of people) who will enter Paradise will be
(glittering) like the full moon, and the batch next to them will be (glittering)
like the most brilliant star in the sky. Their hearts will be as if the heart of a
single man, for they will have neither enmity nor jealousy amongst
themselves; everyone will have two wives from the houris, (who will be so
beautiful, pure and transparent that) the marrow of the bones of their legs
will be seen through the bones and the flesh."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 477:
Narrated Al-Bara (bin Azib):
The Prophet, after the death of his son Ibrahim, said, "There is a wet-nurse
for him (i.e. Ibrahim) in Paradise."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 478:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said, "The people of Paradise will look at the dwellers of the
lofty mansions (i.e. a superior place in Paradise) in the same way as one
looks at a brilliant star far away in the East or in the West on the horizon; all
that is because of their superiority over one another (in rewards)." On that
the people said, "O Allah's Apostle! Are these lofty mansions for the
prophets which nobody else can reach? The Prophet replied," No! "By Allah
in whose Hands my life is, these are for the men who believed in Allah and
also believed in the Apostles."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 479:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
The Prophet said, "Paradise has eight gates, and one of them is called ArRaiyan through which none will enter but those who observe fasting." The
Prophet also said, "If a person spends two different kinds of something (for
Allah's Cause), he will be called from the gates of Paradise."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 480:
Narrated Abu Dhar:
While the Prophet was on a journey, he said (regarding the performance of
the Zuhr prayer), "Wait till it (i.e. the weather) gets cooler." He said the
same again till the shade of the hillocks extended. Then he said, "Delay the
(Zuhr) Prayer till it gets cooler, for the severity of heat is from the increase in
heat of Hell (fire)."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 481:
Narrated Abu Sad: The Prophet said, "Delay the (Zuhr) Prayer till it gets
cooler, for t
Volume 4, Book 54, Number 482:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The (Hell) Fire complained to its Lord saying, 'O my
Lord! My different parts eat up each other.' So, He allowed it to take two
breaths, one in the winter and the other in summer, and this is the reason
for the severe heat and the bitter cold you find (in weather)."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 483:
Narrated Abu Jamra Ad-Dabi:
I used to sit with Ibn 'Abbas in Mecca. Once I had a fever and he said (to
me), "Cool your fever with Zam-zam water, for Allah's Apostle said: 'It, (the
Fever) is from the heat of the (Hell) Fire; so, cool it with water (or Zam-zam
water)."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 484:
Narrated Rafi bin Khadij:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Fever is from the heat of the (Hell) Fire; so cool
it with water."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 485:
Narrated Aisha:
The Prophet said, "Fever is from the heat of the (Hell) Fire, so cool it with
water."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 486:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "Fever is from the heat of the (Hell) Fire; so abate fever
with water."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 487:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Your (ordinary) fire is one of 70 parts of the (Hell)
Fire." Someone asked, "O Allah's Apostle This (ordinary) fire would have
been sufficient (to torture the unbelievers)," Allah's Apostle said, "The (Hell)
Fire has 69 parts more than the ordinary (worldly) fire, each part is as hot as
this (worldly) fire."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 488:
Narrated Yali:
That he heard the Prophet on the pulpit reciting:-"They will cry: "O Malik!' (43.77) (Malik is the gate-keeper (angel) of the
(Hell) Fire.)

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 489:
Narrated Abu Wail:
Somebody said to Usama, "Will you go to so-and-so (i.e. 'Uthman) and talk
to him (i.e. advise him regarding ruling the country)?" He said, "You see that
I don't talk to him. Really I talk to (advise) him secretly without opening a
gate (of affliction), for neither do I want to be the first to open it (i.e.
rebellion), nor will I say to a man who is my ruler that he is the best of all the
people after I have heard something from Allah s Apostle ." They said, What
have you heard him saying? He said, "I have heard him saying, "A man will be
brought on the Day of Resurrection and thrown in the (Hell) Fire, so that his
intestines will come out, and he will go around like a donkey goes around a
millstone. The people of (Hell) Fire will gather around him and say: O so-and-
so! What is wrong with you? Didn't you use to order us to do good deeds
and forbid us to do bad deeds? He will reply: Yes, I used to order you to do
good deeds, but I did not do them myself, and I used to forbid you to do bad
deeds, yet I used to do them myself."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 490:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Magic was worked on the Prophet so that he began to fancy that he was
doing a thing which he was not actually doing. One day he invoked (Allah)
for a long period and then said, "I feel that Allah has inspired me as how to
cure myself. Two persons came to me (in my dream) and sat, one by my
head and the other by my feet. One of them asked the other, "What is the
ailment of this man?" The other replied, 'He has been bewitched" The first
asked, 'Who has bewitched him?' The other replied, 'Lubaid bin Al-A'sam.'
The first one asked, 'What material has he used?' The other replied, 'A comb,
the hair gathered on it, and the outer skin of the pollen of the male datepalm.' The first asked, 'Where is that?' The other replied, 'It is in the well of
Dharwan.' " So, the Prophet went out towards the well and then returned
and said to me on his return, "Its date-palms (the date-palms near the well)
are like the heads of the devils." I asked, "Did you take out those things with
which the magic was worked?" He said, "No, for I have been cured by Allah
and I am afraid that this action may spread evil amongst the people." Later
on the well was filled up with earth.

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 491:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "During your sleep, Satan knots three knots at the back
of the head of each of you, and he breathes the following words at each
knot, 'The night is, long, so keep on sleeping,' If that person wakes up and
celebrates the praises of Allah, then one knot is undone, and when he
performs ablution the second knot is undone, and when he prays, all the
knots are undone, and he gets up in the morning lively and gay, otherwise
he gets up dull and gloomy. "

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 492:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
It was mentioned before the Prophet that there was a man who slept the
night till morning (after sunrise). The Prophet said, "He is a man in whose
ears (or ear) Satan had urinated."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 493:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "If anyone of you, when having sexual relation with his
wife, say: 'In the name of Allah. O Allah! Protect us from Satan and prevent
Satan from approaching our offspring you are going to give us,' and if he
begets a child (as a result of that relation) Satan will not harm it."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 494:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "When the (upper) edge of the sun appears (in the
morning), don't perform a prayer till the sun appears in full, and when the
lower edge of the sun sets, don't perform a prayer till it sets completely.
And you should not seek to pray at sunrise or sunset for the sun rises
between two sides of the head of the devil (or Satan)."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 495:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said, "If while you are praying, somebody intends to pass in
front of you, prevent him; and should he insist, prevent him again; and if he
insists again, fight with him (i.e. prevent him violently e.g. pushing him
violently), because such a person is (like) a devil."
Narrated Muhammad bin Sirin: Abu Huraira said, "Allah's Apostle put me in
charge of the Zakat of Ramadan (i.e. Zakat-ul-Fitr). Someone came to me
and started scooping some of the foodstuff of (Zakat) with both hands. I
caught him and told him that I would take him to Allah's Apostle." Then Abu
Huraira told the whole narration and added "He (i.e. the thief) said,
'Whenever you go to your bed, recite the Verse of "Al-Kursi" (2.255) for then
a guardian from Allah will be guarding you, and Satan will not approach you
till dawn.' " On that the Prophet said, "He told you the truth, though he is a
liar, and he (the thief) himself was the Satan."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 496:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Satan comes to one of you and says, 'Who created soand-so? 'till he says, 'Who has created your Lord?' So, when he inspires such
a question, one should seek refuge with Allah and give up such thoughts."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 497:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "When the month of Ramadan comes, the gates of
Paradise are opened and the gates of the (Hell) Fire are closed, and the
devils are chained."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 498:
Narrated Ubai bin Kab:
That he heard Allah's Apostle saying, "(The prophet) Moses said to his
attendant, "Bring us our early meal' (18.62). The latter said, 'Did you
remember when we betook ourselves to the rock? I indeed forgot the fish
and none but Satan made me forget to remember it." (18.63) Moses did not
feel tired till he had crossed the place which Allah ordered him to go to."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 499:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
I saw Allah's Apostle pointing towards the east saying, "Lo! Afflictions will
verily emerge hence; afflictions will verily emerge hence where the (side of
the head of) Satan appears."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 500:
Narrated Jabir:
The Prophet said, "When nightfalls, then keep your children close to you, for
the devil spread out then. An hour later you can let them free; and close the
gates of your house (at night), and mention Allah's Name thereupon, and
cover your utensils, and mention Allah's Name thereupon, (and if you don't
have something to cover your utensil) you may put across it something (e.g.
a piece of wood etc.)."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 501:
Narrated Safiya bint Huyay:
While Allah's Apostle was in Itikaf, I called on him at night and having had a
talk with him, I got up to depart. He got up also to accompany me to my
dwelling place, which was then in the house of Usama bin Zaid. Two Ansari
men passed by, and when they saw the Prophet they hastened away. The
Prophet said (to them). "Don't hurry! It is Safiya, the daughter of Huyay (i.e.
my wife)." They said, "Glorified be Allah! O Allah's Apostle! (How dare we
suspect you?)" He said, "Satan circulates in the human mind as blood
circulates in it, and I was afraid that Satan might throw an evil thought (or
something) into your hearts."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 502:
Narrated Sulaiman bin Surd:
While I was sitting in the company of the Prophet, two men abused each
other and the face of one of them became red with anger, and his jugular
veins swelled (i.e. he became furious). On that the Prophet said, "I know a
word, the saying of which will cause him to relax, if he does say it. If he says:
'I seek Refuge with Allah from Satan.' then all is anger will go away." Some
body said to him, "The Prophet has said, 'Seek refuge with Allah from
Satan."' The angry man said, "Am I mad?"

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 503:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "If anyone of you, on having sexual relation with his wife,
says: 'O Allah! Protect me from Satan, and prevent Satan from approaching
the offspring you are going to give me,' and if it happens that the lady
conceives a child, Satan will neither harm it nor be given power over it."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 504:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet offered a prayer, and (after finishing) he said, "Satan came in
front of me trying persistently to divert my attention from the prayer, but
Allah gave me the strength to over-power him."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 505:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "When the call for the prayer is pronounced, Satan takes
to his heels, passing wind with noise, When the call for the prayer is finished,
he comes back. And when the Iqama is pronounced, he again takes to his
heels, and after its completion, he returns again to interfere between the
(praying) person and his heart, saying to him. 'Remember this or that thing.'
till the person forgets whether he has offered three or four Rakat: so if one
forgets whether he has prayed three or four Rak'a-t, he should perform two
prostrations of Sahu (i.e. forgetfulness)."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 506:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "When any human being is born. Satan touches him at
both sides of the body with his two fingers, except Jesus, the son of Mary,
whom Satan tried to touch but failed, for he touched the placenta-cover
instead."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 507:
Narrated Alqama:
I went to Sham (and asked. "Who is here?"), The people said, "Abu AdDarda." Abu Darda said, "Is the person whom Allah has protected against
Satan, (as Allah's Apostle said) amongst you". The sub-narrator, Mughira
said that the person who was given Allah's Refuge through the tongue of
the Prophet was 'Ammar (bin Yasir).

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 508:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "While the angels talk amidst the clouds about things that
are going to happen on earth, the devils hear a word of what they say and
pour it in the ears of a soothsayer as one pours something in a bottle, and
they add one hundred lies to that (one word)."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 509:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Yawning is from Satan and if anyone of you yawns, he
should check his yawning as much as possible, for if anyone of you (during
the act of yawning) should say: 'Ha', Satan will laugh at him."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 510:
Narrated 'Aisha:
On the day (of the battle) of Uhud when the pagans were defeated, Satan
shouted, "O slaves of Allah! Beware of the forces at your back," and on that
the Muslims of the front files fought with the Muslims of the back files
(thinking they were pagans). Hudhaifa looked back to see his father "AlYaman," (being attacked by the Muslims). He shouted, "O Allah's Slaves! My
father! My father!" By Allah, they did not stop till they killed him. Hudhaifa
said, "May Allah forgive you." 'Urwa said that Hudhaifa continued to do
good (invoking Allah to forgive the killer of his father till he met Allah (i.e.
died).

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 511:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I asked the Prophet about one's looking here and there during the prayer.
He replied, "It is what Satan steals from the prayer of any one of you."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 512:
Narrated Abu Qatada
as below i.e. Hadith No. 513)

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 513:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
The Prophet said, "A good dream is from Allah, and a bad or evil dream is
from Satan; so if anyone of you has a bad dream of which he gets afraid, he
should spit on his left side and should seek Refuge with Allah from its evil,
for then it will not harm him."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 514:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If one says one-hundred times in one day: "None has
the right to be worshipped but Allah, the Alone Who has no partners, to Him
belongs Dominion and to Him belong all the Praises, and He has power over
all things (i.e. Omnipotent)", one will get the reward of manumitting ten
slaves, and one-hundred good deeds will be written in his account, and onehundred bad deeds will be wiped off or erased from his account, and on that
day he will be protected from the morning till evening from Satan, and
nobody will be superior to him except one who has done more than that
which he has done."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 515:
Narrated Sad bin Abi Waqqas:
Once Umar asked the leave to see Allah's Apostle in whose company there
were some Quraishi women who were talking to him and asking him for
more financial support raising their voices. When 'Umar asked permission to
enter the women got up (quickly) hurrying to screen themselves. When
Allah's Apostle admitted 'Umar, Allah's Apostle was smiling, 'Umar asked,
"O Allah's Apostle! May Allah keep you gay always." Allah's Apostle said, "I
am astonished at these women who were with me. As soon as they heard
your voice, they hastened to screen themselves." 'Umar said, "O Allah's
Apostle! You have more right to be feared by them." Then he addressed
(those women) saying, "O enemies of your own souls! Do you fear me and
not Allah's Apostle ?" They replied. "Yes, for you are a fearful and fierce man
as compared with Allah's Apostle." On that Allah's Apostle said (to 'Umar),
"By Him in Whose Hands my life is, whenever Satan sees you taking a path,
he follows a path other than yours."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 516:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "If anyone of you rouses from sleep and performs the
ablution, he should wash his nose by putting water in it and then blowing it
out thrice, because Satan has stayed in the upper part of his nose all the
night."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 517:
Narrated Abdur-Rahman bin Abdullah bin Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Sasaa
Ansari:
That Abu Said Al-Khudri said to his father. "I see you are fond of sheep and
the desert, so when you want to pronounce the Adhan, raise your voice with
it for whoever will hear the Adhan whether a human being, or a Jinn, or
anything else, will bear witness, in favor on the Day of Resurrection." Abu
Said added, "I have heard this from Allah's Apostle ."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 518:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
That he heard the Prophet delivering a sermon on the pulpit saying, "Kill
snakes and kill Dhu-at-Tufyatain (i.e. a snake with two white lines on its
back) and ALBATROSS (i.e. a snake with short or mutilated tail) for they
destroy the sight of one's eyes and bring about abortion." ('Abdullah bin
'Umar further added): Once while I was chasing a snake in order, to kill it,
Abu Lubaba called me saying: "Don't kill it," I said. "Allah's Apostle ordered
us to kill snakes." He said, "But later on he prohibited the killing of snakes
living in the houses." (Az-Zubri said. "Such snakes are called Al-Awamir.")

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 519:
Narrated Abu Said al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle said, "There will come a time when the best property of a
man will be sheep which he will graze on the tops of mountains and the
places where rain falls (i.e. pastures) escaping to protect his religion from
afflictions."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 520:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The main source of disbelief is in the east. Pride and
arrogance are characteristics of the owners of horses and camels, and those
bedouins who are busy with their camels and pay no attention to Religion;
while modesty and gentleness are the characteristics of the owners of
sheep."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 521:
Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Umar and Abu Mas'ud:
Allah's Apostle pointed with his hand towards Yemen and said, "True Belief
is Yemenite yonder (i.e. the Yemenite, had True Belief and embraced Islam
readily), but sternness and mercilessness are the qualities of those who are
busy with their camels and pay no attention to the Religion where the two
sides of the head of Satan will appear. Such qualities belong to the tribe of
Rabi'a and Mudar."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 522:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "When you hear the crowing of cocks, ask for Allah's
Blessings for (their crowing indicates that) they have seen an angel. And
when you hear the braying of donkeys, seek Refuge with Allah from Satan
for (their braying indicates) that they have seen a Satan."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 524:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "A group of Israelites were lost. Nobody knows what they
did. But I do not see them except that they were cursed and changed into
rats, for if you put the milk of a she-camel in front of a rat, it will not drink it,
but if the milk of a sheep is put in front of it, it will drink it." I told this to Ka'b
who asked me, "Did you hear it from the Prophet ?" I said, "Yes." Ka'b asked
me the same question several times.; I said to Ka'b. "Do I read the Torah?
(i.e. I tell you this from the Prophet.)"

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 525:
Narrated Aisha:
The Prophet called the Salamander, a mischief-doer. I have not heard him
ordering that it should be killed. Sad bin Waqqas claims that the Prophet
ordered that it should be killed
Volume 4, Book 54, Number 526:
Narrated Um Sharik:
That the Prophet ordered her to kill Salamanders.

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 527:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "Kill the snake with two white lines on its back, for it
blinds the on-looker and causes abortion."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 528:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet ordered that a short-tailed or mutilated-tailed snake (i.e. Abtar)
should be killed, for it blinds the on-looker and causes abortion."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 529:
Narrated Abu Mulaika:
Ibn Umar used to kill snakes, but afterwards he forbade their killing and said,
"Once the Prophet pulled down a wall and saw a cast-off skin of a snake in
it. He said, 'Look for the snake. 'They found it and the Prophet said, "Kill it."
For this reason I used to kill snakes. Later on I met Abu Lubaba who told me
the Prophet said, 'Do not kill snakes except the short-tailed or mutilatedtailed snake with two white lines on its back, for it causes abortion and
makes one blind. So kill it.' "

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 530:
Narrated Nafi:
Ibn 'Umar used to kill snakes but when Abu Lubaba informed him that the
Prophet had forbidden the killing of snakes living in houses, he gave up
killing them.

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 531:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "Five kinds of animals are mischief-doers and can be killed
even in the Sanctuary: They are the rat the scorpion, the kite, the crow and
the rabid dog."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 532:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "It is not sinful of a person in the state of Ihram to kill
any of these five animals: The scorpion, the rat, the rabid dog, the crow and
the kite."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 533:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "Cover your utensils and tie your water skins, and close
your doors and keep your children close to you at night, as the Jinns spread
out at such time and snatch things away. When you go to bed, put out your
lights, for the mischief-doer (i.e. the rat) may drag away the wick of the
candle and burn the dwellers of the house." Ata said, "The devils." (instead
of the Jinns).

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 534:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
Once we were in the company of Allah's Apostle in a cave. Surat-al-Mursalat
(77) was revealed there, and we were learning it from Allah's Apostle .
Suddenly a snake came out of its hole and we rushed towards it to kill it, but
it hastened and entered its hole before we were able to catch it. Allah's
Apostle said," It has been saved from your evil and you have been saved
from its evil."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 535:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar: The Prophet said, "A woman entered the (Hell) Fire
because of a cat which she had tied, neither giving it food nor setting it free
to eat from the vermin of the earth."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 536:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Once while a prophet amongst the prophets was
taking a rest underneath a tree, an ant bit him. He, therefore, ordered that
his luggage be taken away from underneath that tree and then ordered that
the dwelling place of the ants should be set on fire. Allah sent him a
revelation:-- "Wouldn't it have been sufficient to burn a single ant? (that bit
you): (See Page 162, chapter No. 153).

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 537:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said "If a house fly falls in the drink of anyone of you, he should
dip it (in the drink), for one of its wings has a disease and the other has the
cure for the disease."
Volume 4, Book 54, Number 538:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "A prostitute was forgiven by Allah, because, passing by
a panting dog near a well and seeing that the dog was about to die of thirst,
she took off her shoe, and tying it with her head-cover she drew out some
water for it. So, Allah forgave her because of that."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 539:
Narrated Abu Talha:
The Prophet said, "Angels do not enter a house witch has either a dog or a
picture in it."

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 540:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle ordered that the dogs should be killed.

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 541:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If somebody keeps a dog, he loses one Qirat (of the
reward) of his good deeds everyday, except if he keeps it for the purpose of
agriculture or for the protection of livestock. "

Volume 4, Book 54, Number 542:
Narrated Sufyan bin Abi Zuhair Ash-Shani:
That he heard Allah's Apostle saying, "If somebody keeps a dog that is
neither used for farm work nor for guarding the livestock, he will lose one
Qirat (of the reward) of his good deeds everyday."
BOOK 55. PROPHETS (543-658)
Volume 4, Book 55, Number 543:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah created Adam, making him 60 cubits tall. When He
created him, He said to him, "Go and greet that group of angels, and listen
to their reply, for it will be your greeting (salutation) and the greeting
(salutations of your offspring." So, Adam said (to the angels), As-Salamu
Alaikum (i.e. Peace be upon you). The angels said, "As-salamu Alaika wa
Rahmatu-l-lahi" (i.e. Peace and Allah's Mercy be upon you). Thus the angels
added to Adam's salutation the expression, 'Wa Rahmatu-l-lahi,' Any person
who will enter Paradise will resemble Adam (in appearance and figure).
People have been decreasing in stature since Adam's creation.

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 544:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The first group of people who will enter Paradise, will
be glittering like the full moon and those who will follow them, will glitter
like the most brilliant star in the sky. They will not urinate, relieve nature,
spit, or have any nasal secretions. Their combs will be of gold, and their
sweat will smell like musk. The aloes-wood will be used in their centers.
Their wives will be houris. All of them will look alike and will resemble their
father Adam (in statute), sixty cubits tall."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 545:
Narrated Abu Salama:
Um Salama said, "Um Salaim said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Allah does not refrain
from saying the truth! Is it obligatory for a woman to take a bath after she
gets nocturnal discharge?' He said, 'Yes, if she notices the water (i.e.
discharge).' Um Salama smiled and said, 'Does a woman get discharge?'
Allah's Apostle said. 'Then why does a child resemble (its mother)?"

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 546:
Narrated Anas:
When 'Abdullah bin Salam heard the arrival of the Prophet at Medina, he
came to him and said, "I am going to ask you about three things which
nobody knows except a prophet: What is the first portent of the Hour? What
will be the first meal taken by the people of Paradise? Why does a child
resemble its father, and why does it resemble its maternal uncle" Allah's
Apostle said, "Gabriel has just now told me of their answers." 'Abdullah said,
"He (i.e. Gabriel), from amongst all the angels, is the enemy of the Jews."
Allah's Apostle said, "The first portent of the Hour will be a fire that will
bring together the people from the east to the west; the first meal of the
people of Paradise will be Extra-lobe (caudate lobe) of fish-liver. As for the
resemblance of the child to its parents: If a man has sexual intercourse with
his wife and gets discharge first, the child will resemble the father, and if the
woman gets discharge first, the child will resemble her." On that 'Abdullah
bin Salam said, "I testify that you are the Apostle of Allah." 'Abdullah bin
Salam further said, "O Allah's Apostle! The Jews are liars, and if they should
come to know about my conversion to Islam before you ask them (about
me), they would tell a lie about me." The Jews came to Allah's Apostle and
'Abdullah went inside the house. Allah's Apostle asked (the Jews), "What
kind of man is 'Abdullah bin Salam amongst you?" They replied, "He is the
most learned person amongst us, and the best amongst us, and the son of
the best amongst us." Allah's Apostle said, "What do you think if he
embraces Islam (will you do as he does)?" The Jews said, "May Allah save
him from it." Then 'Abdullah bin Salam came out in front of them saying, "I
testify that None has the right to be worshipped but Allah and that
Muhammad is the Apostle of Allah." Thereupon they said, "He is the evilest
among us, and the son of the evilest amongst us," and continued talking
badly of him.
Volume 4, Book 55, Number 547:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "But for the Israelis, meat would not decay and but for
Eve, wives would never betray their husbands."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 548:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah 's Apostle said, "Treat women nicely, for a women is created from a
rib, and the most curved portion of the rib is its upper portion, so, if you
should try to straighten it, it will break, but if you leave it as it is, it will
remain crooked. So treat women nicely."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 549:
Narrated Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle, the true and truly inspired said, "(as regards your creation),
every one of you is collected in the womb of his mother for the first forty
days, and then he becomes a clot for an other forty days, and then a piece of
flesh for an other forty days. Then Allah sends an angel to write four words:
He writes his deeds, time of his death, means of his livelihood, and whether
he will be wretched or blessed (in religion). Then the soul is breathed into
his body. So a man may do deeds characteristic of the people of the (Hell)
Fire, so much so that there is only the distance of a cubit between him and
it, and then what has been written (by the angel) surpasses, and so he starts
doing deeds characteristic of the people of Paradise and enters Paradise.
Similarly, a person may do deeds characteristic of the people of Paradise, so
much so that there is only the distance of a cubit between him and it, and
then what has been written (by the angel) surpasses, and he starts doing
deeds of the people of the (Hell) Fire and enters the (Hell) Fire."
Volume 4, Book 55, Number 550:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "Allah has appointed an angel in the womb, and the angel
says, 'O Lord! A drop of discharge (i.e. of semen), O Lord! a clot, O Lord! a
piece of flesh.' And then, if Allah wishes to complete the child's creation, the
angel will say. 'O Lord! A male or a female? O Lord! wretched or blessed (in
religion)? What will his livelihood be? What will his age be?' The angel writes
all this while the child is in the womb of its mother."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 551:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "Allah will say to that person of the (Hell) Fire who will
receive the least punishment, 'If you had everything on the earth, would you
give it as a ransom to free yourself (i.e. save yourself from this Fire)?' He will
say, 'Yes.' Then Allah will say, 'While you were in the backbone of Adam, I
asked you much less than this, i.e. not to worship others besides Me, but
you insisted on worshipping others besides me.' "

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 552:
Narrated Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whenever a person is murdered unjustly, there is a
share from the burden of the crime on the first son of Adam for he was the
first to start the tradition of murdering."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 553:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
Once Allah's Apostle stood amongst the people, glorified and praised Allah
as He deserved and then mentioned the Dajjal saying, "l warn you against
him (i.e. the Dajjal) and there was no prophet but warned his nation against
him. No doubt, Noah warned his nation against him but I tell you about him
something of which no prophet told his nation before me. You should know
that he is one-eyed, and Allah is not one-eyed."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 554:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Shall I not tell you about the Dajjal a story of which no
prophet told his nation? The Dajjall is one-eyed and will bring with him what
will resemble Hell and Paradise, and what he will call Paradise will be actually
Hell; so I warn you (against him) as Noah warned his nation against him."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 555:
Narrated Abu Said:
Allah's Apostle said, "Noah and his nation will come (on the Day of
Resurrection and Allah will ask (Noah), "Did you convey (the Message)?' He
will reply, 'Yes, O my Lord!' Then Allah will ask Noah's nation, 'Did Noah
convey My Message to you?' They will reply, 'No, no prophet came to us.'
Then Allah will ask Noah, 'Who will stand a witness for you?' He will reply,
'Muhammad and his followers (will stand witness for me).' So, I and my
followers will stand as witnesses for him (that he conveyed Allah's
Message)." That is, (the interpretation) of the Statement of Allah: "Thus we
have made you a just and the best nation that you might be witnesses Over
mankind .." (2.143)

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 556:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
We were in the company of the Prophet at a banquet and a cooked
(mutton) forearm was set before him, and he used to like it. He ate a morsel
of it and said, "I will be the chief of all the people on the Day of
Resurrection. Do you know how Allah will gather all the first and the last
(people) in one level place where an observer will be able to see (all) of
them and they will be able to hear the announcer, and the sun will come
near to them. Some People will say: Don't you see, in what condition you are
and the state to which you have reached? Why don't you look for a person
who can intercede for you with your Lord? Some people will say: Appeal to
your father, Adam.' They will go to him and say: 'O Adam! You are the father
of all mankind, and Allah created you with His Own Hands, and ordered the
angels to prostrate for you, and made you live in Paradise. Will you not
intercede for us with your Lord? Don't you see in what (miserable) state we
are, and to what condition we have reached?' On that Adam will reply, 'My
Lord is so angry as He has never been before and will never be in the future;
(besides), He forbade me (to eat from) the tree, but I disobeyed (Him), (I am
worried about) myself! Myself! Go to somebody else; go to Noah.' They will
go to Noah and say; 'O Noah! You are the first amongst the messengers of
Allah to the people of the earth, and Allah named you a thankful slave. Don't
you see in what a (miserable) state we are and to what condition we have
reached? Will you not intercede for us with your Lord? Noah will reply:
'Today my Lord has become so angry as he had never been before and will
never be in the future Myself! Myself! Go to the Prophet (Muhammad). The
people will come to me, and I will prostrate myself underneath Allah's
Throne. Then I will be addressed: 'O Muhammad! Raise your head; intercede,
for your intercession will be accepted, and ask (for anything). for you will be
given. "

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 557:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle recited the following Verse) in the usual tone: 'Fahal-MinMuddalkir.' (54.15)

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 558:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "I have been made victorious with As-Saba (i.e. an easterly
wind) and the people of 'Ad were destroyed by Ad-Dabur (i.e. a westerly
wind)." Narrated Abu Said: Ali sent a piece of gold to the Prophet who
distributed it among four persons: Al-Aqra' bin Habis Al-Hanzali from the
tribe of Mujashi, 'Uyaina bin Badr Al-Fazari, Zaid At-Ta'i who belonged to
(the tribe of) Bani Nahban, and 'Alqama bin Ulatha Al-'Amir who belonged
to (the tribe of) Bani Kilab. So the Quraish and the Ansar became angry and
said, "He (i.e. the Prophet, ) gives the chief of Najd and does not give us."
The Prophet said, "I give them) so as to attract their hearts (to Islam)." Then
a man with sunken eyes, prominent checks, a raised forehead, a thick beard
and a shaven head, came (in front of the Prophet ) and said, "Be afraid of
Allah, O Muhammad!" The Prophet ' said "Who would obey Allah if I
disobeyed Him? (Is it fair that) Allah has trusted all the people of the earth to
me while, you do not trust me?" Somebody who, I think was Khalid bin AlWalid, requested the Prophet to let him chop that man's head off, but he
prevented him. When the man left, the Prophet said, "Among the off-spring
of this man will be some who will recite the Qur'an but the Qur'an will not
reach beyond their throats (i.e. they will recite like parrots and will not
understand it nor act on it), and they will renegade from the religion as an
arrow goes through the game's body. They will kill the Muslims but will not
disturb the idolaters. If I should live up to their time' I will kill them as the
people of 'Ad were killed (i.e. I will kill all of them)."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 559:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
I heard the Prophet reciting: "Fahal Min Muddakir." (See Hadith No. 557)

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 560:
Narrated Abdullah bin Zam'a:
I heard the Prophet while referring to the person who had cut the legs of
the she-camel (of the Prophet Salih), saying, "The man who was appointed
for doing this job, was a man of honor and power in his nation like Abu
Zam'a,"

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 561:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
When Allah's Apostle landed at Al-Hijr during the Ghazwa of Tabuk, he
ordered his companions not to drink water from its well or reserve water
from it. They said, "We have already kneaded the dough with its water. and
also filled our bags with its water.'' On that, the Prophet ordered them to
throw away the dough and pour out the water.

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 562:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
The people landed at the land of Thamud called Al-Hijr along with Allah's
Apostle and they took water from its well for drinking and kneading the
dough with it as well. (When Allah's Apostle heard about it) he ordered
them to pour out the water they had taken from its wells and feed the
camels with the dough, and ordered them to take water from the well
whence the she-camel (of Prophet Salih) used to drink.

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 563:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
When the Prophet passed by (a place called) Al Hijr, he said, "Do not enter
the house of those who were unjust to themselves, unless (you enter)
weeping, lest you should suffer the same punishment as was inflicted upon
them." After that he covered his face with his sheet cloth while he was on
the camel-saddle.
Volume 4, Book 55, Number 564:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Do not enter the ruined dwellings of those who were
unjust to themselves unless (you enter) weeping, lest you should suffer the
same punishment as was inflicted upon them."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 565:
Narrated Zainab bint Jahsh:
That the Prophet once came to her in a state of fear and said, "None has the
right to be worshipped but Allah. Woe unto the Arabs from a danger that
has come near. An opening has been made in the wall of Gog and Magog
like this," making a circle with his thumb and index finger. Zainab bint Jahsh
said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall we be destroyed even though there are pious
persons among us?" He said, "Yes, when the evil person will increase."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 566:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah has made an opening in the wall of the Gog and
Magog (people) like this, and he made with his hand (with the help of his
fingers).

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 567:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said, "Allah will say (on the Day of Resurrection), 'O Adam.'
Adam will reply, 'Labbaik wa Sa'daik', and all the good is in Your Hand.' Allah
will say: 'Bring out the people of the fire.' Adam will say: 'O Allah! How many
are the people of the Fire?' Allah will reply: 'From every one thousand, tak
out nine-hundred-and ninety-nine.' At that time children will become hoary
headed, every pregnant female will have a miscarriage, and one will see
mankind as drunken, yet they will not be drunken, but dreadful will be the
Wrath of Allah." The companions of the Prophet asked, "O Allah's Apostle!
Who is that (excepted) one?" He said, "Rejoice with glad tidings; one person
will be from you and one-thousand will be from Gog and Magog."
The Prophet further said, "By Him in Whose Hands my life is, hope that you
will be one-fourth of the people of Paradise." We shouted, "Allahu Akbar!"
He added, "I hope that you will be one-third of the people of Paradise." We
shouted, "Allahu Akbar!" He said, "I hope that you will be half of the people
of Paradise." We shouted, "Allahu Akbar!" He further said, "You (Muslims)
(compared with non Muslims) are like a black hair in the skin of a white ox or
like a white hair in the skin of a black ox (i.e. your number is very small as
compared with theirs)."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 568:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet said, "You will be gathered (on the Day of Judgment), barefooted, naked and not circumcised." He then recited:--'As We began the first
creation, We, shall repeat it: A Promise We have undertaken: Truly we shall
do it.' (21.104) He added, "The first to be dressed on the Day of Resurrection,
will be Abraham, and some of my companions will be taken towards the left
side (i.e. to the (Hell) Fire), and I will say: 'My companions! My companions!'
It will be said: 'They renegade from Islam after you left them.' Then I will say
as the Pious slave of Allah (i.e. Jesus) said. 'And I was a witness Over them
while I dwelt amongst them. When You took me up You were the Watcher
over them, And You are a witness to all things. If You punish them. They are
Your slaves And if You forgive them, Verily you, only You are the All-Mighty,
the All-Wise." (5.120-121)

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 569:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "On the Day of Resurrection Abraham will meet his father
Azar whose face will be dark and covered with dust.(The Prophet Abraham
will say to him): 'Didn't I tell you not to disobey me?' His father will reply:
'Today I will not disobey you.' 'Abraham will say: 'O Lord! You promised me
not to disgrace me on the Day of Resurrection; and what will be more
disgraceful to me than cursing and dishonoring my father?' Then Allah will
say (to him):' 'I have forbidden Paradise for the disbelievers." Then he will
be addressed, 'O Abraham! Look! What is underneath your feet?' He will
look and there he will see a Dhabh (an animal,) blood-stained, which will be
caught by the legs and thrown in the (Hell) Fire."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 570:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet entered the Ka'ba and found in it the pictures of (Prophet)
Abraham and Mary. On that he said' "What is the matter with them ( i.e.
Quraish)? They have already heard that angels do not enter a house in which
there are pictures; yet this is the picture of Abraham. And why is he depicted
as practicing divination by arrows?"

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 571:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
When the Prophet saw pictures in the Ka'ba, he did not enter it till he
ordered them to be erased. When he saw (the pictures of Abraham and
Ishmael carrying the arrows of divination, he said, "May Allah curse them
(i.e. the Quraish)! By Allah, neither Abraham nor Ishmael practiced divination
by arrows."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 572:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The people said, "O Allah's Apostle! Who is the most honorable amongst the
people (in Allah's Sight)?" He said, "The most righteous amongst them."
They said, "We do not ask you, about this. " He said, "Then Joseph, Allah's
Prophet, the son of Allah's Prophet, The son of Allah's Prophet the son of
Allah's Khalil (i.e. Abraham)." They said, "We do not want to ask about this,"
He said' "Then you want to ask about the descent of the Arabs. Those who
were the best in the pre-lslamic period of ignorance will be the best in Islam
provided they comprehend the religious knowledge."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 573:
Narrated Samura:
Allah's Apostle said, "Two persons came to me at night (in dream) (and took
me along with them). We passed by a tall man who was so tall that I was not
able to see his head and that person was Abraham."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 574:
Narrated Mujahid:
That when the people mentioned before Ibn 'Abbas that the Dajjal would
have the word Kafir, (i.e. unbeliever) or the letters Kafir (the root of the
Arabic verb 'disbelieve') written on his forehead, I heard Ibn 'Abbas saying,
"I did not hear this, but the Prophet said, 'If you want to see Abraham, then
look at your companion (i.e. the Prophet) but Moses was a curly-haired,
brown man (who used to ride) a red camel, the reins of which was made of
fires of date-palms. As if I were now looking down a valley."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 575:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Abraham did his circumcision with an adze at the age
of eighty."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 576:
Narrated Abu Az-Zinad:
(as above in Hadith No. 575) With an adze.

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 577:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Abraham did not tell a lie except on three occasions."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 578:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Abraham did not tell a lie except on three occasion. Twice for the Sake of
Allah when he said, "I am sick," and he said, "(I have not done this but) the
big idol has done it." The (third was) that while Abraham and Sarah (his
wife) were going (on a journey) they passed by (the territory of) a tyrant.
Someone said to the tyrant, "This man (i.e. Abraham) is accompanied by a
very charming lady." So, he sent for Abraham and asked him about Sarah
saying, "Who is this lady?" Abraham said, "She is my sister." Abraham went
to Sarah and said, "O Sarah! There are no believers on the surface of the
earth except you and I. This man asked me about you and I have told him
that you are my sister, so don't contradict my statement." The tyrant then
called Sarah and when she went to him, he tried to take hold of her with his
hand, but (his hand got stiff and) he was confounded. He asked Sarah. "Pray
to Allah for me, and I shall not harm you." So Sarah asked Allah to cure him
and he got cured. He tried to take hold of her for the second time, but (his
hand got as stiff as or stiffer than before and) was more confounded. He
again requested Sarah, "Pray to Allah for me, and I will not harm you." Sarah
asked Allah again and he became alright. He then called one of his guards
(who had brought her) and said, "You have not brought me a human being
but have brought me a devil." The tyrant then gave Hajar as a girl-servant to
Sarah. Sarah came back (to Abraham) while he was praying. Abraham,
gesturing with his hand, asked, "What has happened?" She replied, "Allah
has spoiled the evil plot of the infidel (or immoral person) and gave me Hajar
for service." (Abu Huraira then addressed his listeners saying, "That (Hajar)
was your mother, O Bani Ma-is-Sama (i.e. the Arabs, the descendants of
Ishmael, Hajar's son)."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 579:
Narrated Um Sharik:
Allah's Apostle ordered that the salamander should be killed and said, "It
(i.e. the salamander) blew (the fire) on Abraham."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 580:
Narrated Abdullah:
When the Verse:--"It is those who believe and do not confuse their belief
with wrong ( i.e. joining others in worship with Allah" (6.83) was revealed,
we said, "O Allah's Apostle! Who is there amongst us who has not done
wrong to himself?" He replied, "It is not as you say, for 'wrong' in the Verse
and 'do not confuse their belief, with wrong means 'SHIRK' (i.e. joining
others in worship with Allah). Haven't you heard Luqman's saying to his son,
'O my son! Join not others in worship with Allah, verily joining others in
worship with Allah is a great wrong indeed." (31.13)

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 581:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
One day some meat was given to the Prophet and he said, "On the Day of
Resurrection Allah will gather all the first and the last (people) in one plain,
and the voice of the announcer will reach all of them, and one will be able to
see them all, and the sun will come closer to them." (The narrator then
mentioned the narration of intercession): "The people will go to Abraham
and say: 'You are Allah's Prophet and His Khalil on the earth. Will you
intercede for us with your Lord?' Abraham will then remember his lies and
say: 'Myself! Myself! Go to Moses."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 582:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "May Allah bestow His Mercy on the mother of Ishmael!
Had she not hastened (to fill her water-skin with water from the Zam-zam
well). Zam-zam would have been a stream flowing on the surface of the
earth." Ibn 'Abbas further added, "(The Prophet) Abraham brought Ishmael
and his mother (to Mecca) and she was suckling Ishmael and she had a
water-skin with her.'

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 583:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The first lady to use a girdle was the mother of Ishmael. She used a girdle so
that she might hide her tracks from Sarah. Abraham brought her and her
son Ishmael while she was suckling him, to a place near the Ka'ba under a
tree on the spot of Zam-zam, at the highest place in the mosque. During
those days there was nobody in Mecca, nor was there any water So he made
them sit over there and placed near them a leather bag containing some
dates, and a small water-skin containing some water, and set out
homeward. Ishmael's mother followed him saying, "O Abraham! Where are
you going, leaving us in this valley where there is no person whose company
we may enjoy, nor is there anything (to enjoy)?" She repeated that to him
many times, but he did not look back at her Then she asked him, "Has Allah
ordered you to do so?" He said, "Yes." She said, "Then He will not neglect
us," and returned while Abraham proceeded onwards, and on reaching the
Thaniya where they could not see him, he faced the Ka'ba, and raising both
hands, invoked Allah saying the following prayers:
'O our Lord! I have made some of my offspring dwell in a valley without
cultivation, by Your Sacred House (Kaba at Mecca) in order, O our Lord, that
they may offer prayer perfectly. So fill some hearts among men with love
towards them, and (O Allah) provide them with fruits, so that they may give
thanks.' (14.37) Ishmael's mother went on suckling Ishmael and drinking
from the water (she had).
When the water in the water-skin had all been used up, she became thirsty
and her child also became thirsty. She started looking at him (i.e. Ishmael)
tossing in agony; She left him, for she could not endure looking at him, and
found that the mountain of Safa was the nearest mountain to her on that
land. She stood on it and started looking at the valley keenly so that she
might see somebody, but she could not see anybody. Then she descended
from Safa and when she reached the valley, she tucked up her robe and ran
in the valley like a person in distress and trouble, till she crossed the valley
and reached the Marwa mountain where she stood and started looking,
expecting to see somebody, but she could not see anybody. She repeated
that (running between Safa and Marwa) seven times."
The Prophet said, "This is the source of the tradition of the walking of
people between them (i.e. Safa and Marwa). When she reached the Marwa
(for the last time) she heard a voice and she asked herself to be quiet and
listened attentively. She heard the voice again and said, 'O, (whoever you
may be)! You have made me hear your voice; have you got something to
help me?" And behold! She saw an angel at the place of Zam-zam, digging
the earth with his heel (or his wing), till water flowed from that place. She
started to make something like a basin around it, using her hand in this way,
and started filling her water-skin with water with her hands, and the water
was flowing out after she had scooped some of it."
The Prophet added, "May Allah bestow Mercy on Ishmael's mother! Had she
let the Zam-zam (flow without trying to control it) (or had she not scooped
from that water) (to fill her water-skin), Zam-zam would have been a stream
flowing on the surface of the earth." The Prophet further added, "Then she
drank (water) and suckled her child. The angel said to her, 'Don't be afraid of
being neglected, for this is the House of Allah which will be built by this boy
and his father, and Allah never neglects His people.' The House (i.e. Kaba) at
that time was on a high place resembling a hillock, and when torrents came,
they flowed to its right and left. She lived in that way till some people from
the tribe of Jurhum or a family from Jurhum passed by her and her child, as
they (i.e. the Jurhum people) were coming through the way of Kada'. They
landed in the lower part of Mecca where they saw a bird that had the habit
of flying around water and not leaving it. They said, 'This bird must be flying
around water, though we know that there is no water in this valley.' They
sent one or two messengers who discovered the source of water, and
returned to inform them of the water. So, they all came (towards the
water)." The Prophet added, "Ishmael's mother was sitting near the water.
They asked her, 'Do you allow us to stay with you?" She replied, 'Yes, but
you will have no right to possess the water.' They agreed to that." The
Prophet further said, "Ishmael's mother was pleased with the whole
situation as she used to love to enjoy the company of the people. So, they
settled there, and later on they sent for their families who came and settled
with them so that some families became permanent residents there. The
child (i.e. Ishmael) grew up and learnt Arabic from them and (his virtues)
caused them to love and admire him as he grew up, and when he reached
the age of puberty they made him marry a woman from amongst them.
After Ishmael's mother had died, Abraham came after Ishmael's marriage in
order to see his family that he had left before, but he did not find Ishmael
there. When he asked Ishmael's wife about him, she replied, 'He has gone in
search of our livelihood.' Then he asked her about their way of living and
their condition, and she replied, 'We are living in misery; we are living in
hardship and destitution,' complaining to him. He said, 'When your husband
returns, convey my salutation to him and tell him to change the threshold of
the gate (of his house).' When Ishmael came, he seemed to have felt
something unusual, so he asked his wife, 'Has anyone visited you?' She
replied, 'Yes, an old man of so-and-so description came and asked me about
you and I informed him, and he asked about our state of living, and I told
him that we were living in a hardship and poverty.' On that Ishmael said, 'Did
he advise you anything?' She replied, 'Yes, he told me to convey his
salutation to you and to tell you to change the threshold of your gate.'
Ishmael said, 'It was my father, and he has ordered me to divorce you. Go
back to your family.' So, Ishmael divorced her and married another woman
from amongst them (i.e. Jurhum).
Then Abraham stayed away from them for a period as long as Allah wished
and called on them again but did not find Ishmael. So he came to Ishmael's
wife and asked her about Ishmael. She said, 'He has gone in search of our
livelihood.' Abraham asked her, 'How are you getting on?' asking her about
their sustenance and living. She replied, 'We are prosperous and well-off (i.e.
we have everything in abundance).' Then she thanked Allah' Abraham said,
'What kind of food do you eat?' She said. 'Meat.' He said, 'What do you
drink?' She said, 'Water." He said, "O Allah! Bless their meat and water." The
Prophet added, "At that time they did not have grain, and if they had grain,
he would have also invoked Allah to bless it." The Prophet added, "If
somebody has only these two things as his sustenance, his health and
disposition will be badly affected, unless he lives in Mecca." The Prophet
added," Then Abraham said Ishmael's wife, "When your husband comes,
give my regards to him and tell him that he should keep firm the threshold
of his gate.' When Ishmael came back, he asked his wife, 'Did anyone call on
you?' She replied, 'Yes, a good-looking old man came to me,' so she praised
him and added. 'He asked about you, and I informed him, and he asked
about our livelihood and I told him that we were in a good condition.'
Ishmael asked her, 'Did he give you any piece of advice?' She said, 'Yes, he
told me to give his regards to you and ordered that you should keep firm the
threshold of your gate.' On that Ishmael said, 'It was my father, and you are
the threshold (of the gate). He has ordered me to keep you with me.'
Then Abraham stayed away from them for a period as long as Allah wished,
and called on them afterwards. He saw Ishmael under a tree near Zamzam,
sharpening his arrows. When he saw Abraham, he rose up to welcome him
(and they greeted each other as a father does with his son or a son does
with his father). Abraham said, 'O Ishmael! Allah has given me an order.'
Ishmael said, 'Do what your Lord has ordered you to do.' Abraham asked,
'Will you help me?' Ishmael said, 'I will help you.' Abraham said, Allah has
ordered me to build a house here,' pointing to a hillock higher than the land
surrounding it." The Prophet added, "Then they raised the foundations of
the House (i.e. the Ka'ba). Ishmael brought the stones and Abraham was
building, and when the walls became high, Ishmael brought this stone and
put it for Abraham who stood over it and carried on building, while Ishmael
was handing him the stones, and both of them were saying, 'O our Lord!
Accept (this service) from us, Verily, You are the All-Hearing, the AllKnowing.' The Prophet added, "Then both of them went on building and
going round the Ka'ba saying: O our Lord ! Accept (this service) from us,
Verily, You are the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing." (2.127)

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 584:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
When Abraham had differences with his wife), (because of her jealousy of
Hajar, Ishmael's mother), he took Ishmael and his mother and went away.
They had a water-skin with them containing some water, Ishmael's mother
used to drink water from the water-skin so that her milk would increase for
her child. When Abraham reached Mecca, he made her sit under a tree and
afterwards returned home. Ishmael's mother followed him, and when they
reached Kada', she called him from behind, 'O Abraham! To whom are you
leaving us?' He replied, '(I am leaving you) to Allah's (Care).' She said, 'I am
satisfied to be with Allah.' She returned to her place and started drinking
water from the water-skin, and her milk increased for her child. When the
water had all been used up, she said to herself, 'I'd better go and look so
that I may see somebody.' She ascended the Safa mountain and looked,
hoping to see somebody, but in vain. When she came down to the valley,
she ran till she reached the Marwa mountain. She ran to and fro (between
the two mountains) many times. They she said to herself, 'i'd better go and
see the state of the child,' she went and found it in a state of one on the
point of dying. She could not endure to watch it dying and said (to herself),
'If I go and look, I may find somebody.' She went and ascended the Safa
mountain and looked for a long while but could not find anybody. Thus she
completed seven rounds (of running) between Safa and Marwa. Again she
said (to herself), 'I'd better go back and see the state of the child.' But
suddenly she heard a voice, and she said to that strange voice, 'Help us if
you can offer any help.' Lo! It was Gabriel (who had made the voice). Gabriel
hit the earth with his heel like this (Ibn 'Abbas hit the earth with his heel to
Illustrate it), and so the water gushed out. Ishmael's mother was astonished
and started digging. (Abu Al-Qasim) (i.e. the Prophet) said, "If she had left
the water, (flow naturally without her intervention), it would have been
flowing on the surface of the earth.") Ishmael's mother started drinking
from the water and her milk increased for her child . Afterwards some
people of the tribe of Jurhum, while passing through the bottom of the
valley, saw some birds, and that astonished them, and they said, 'Birds can
only be found at a place where there is water.' They sent a messenger who
searched the place and found the water, and returned to inform them about
it. Then they all went to her and said, 'O ishmael's mother! Will you allow us
to be with you (or dwell with you)?' (And thus they stayed there.) Later on
her boy reached the age of puberty and married a lady from them. Then an
idea occurred to Abraham which he disclosed to his wife (Sarah), 'I want to
call on my dependents I left (at Mecca).' When he went there, he greeted
(Ishmael's wife) and said, 'Where is Ishmael?' She replied, 'He has gone out
hunting.' Abraham said (to her), 'When he comes, tell him to change the
threshold of his gate.' When he came, she told him the same whereupon
Ishmael said to her, 'You are the threshold, so go to your family (i.e. you are
divorced).' Again Abraham thought of visiting his dependents whom he had
left (at Mecca), and he told his wife (Sarah) of his intentions. Abraham came
to Ishmael's house and asked. "Where is Ishmael?" Ishmael's wife replied,
"He has gone out hunting," and added, "Will you stay (for some time) and
have something to eat and drink?' Abraham asked, 'What is your food and
what is your drink?' She replied, 'Our food is meat and our drink is water.' He
said, 'O Allah! Bless their meals and their drink." Abu Al-Qa-sim (i.e. Prophet)
said, "Because of Abraham's invocation there are blessings (in Mecca)."
Once more Abraham thought of visiting his family he had left (at Mecca), so
he told his wife (Sarah) of his decision. He went and found Ishmael behind
the Zam-zam well, mending his arrows. He said, "O Ishmael, Your Lord has
ordered me to build a house for Him." Ishmael said, "Obey (the order of)
your Lord." Abraham said, "Allah has also ordered me that you should help
me therein." Ishmael said, "Then I will do." So, both of them rose and
Abraham started building (the Ka'ba) while Ishmael went on handing him
the stones, and both of them were saying, "O our Lord ! Accept (this
service) from us, Verily, You are the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing." (2.127).
When the building became high and the old man (i.e. Abraham) could no
longer lift the stones (to such a high position), he stood over the stone of AlMaqam and Ishmael carried on handing him the stones, and both of them
were saying, 'O our Lord! Accept (this service) from us, Verily You are AllHearing, All-Knowing." (2.127)

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 585:
Narrated Abu Dhar:
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Which mosque was first built on the surface of the
earth?" He said, "Al-Masjid-ul-,Haram (in Mecca)." I said, "Which was built
next?" He replied "The mosque of Al-Aqsa ( in Jerusalem) ." I said, "What
was the period of construction between the two?" He said, "Forty years." He
added, "Wherever (you may be, and) the prayer time becomes due, perform
the prayer there, for the best thing is to do so (i.e. to offer the prayers in
time)."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 586:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
When the mountain of Uhud came in the sight of Allah's Apostle he said.
"This is a mountain that loves us and is loved by us. O Allah! Abraham made
Mecca a sanctuary, and I make (the area) in between these two mountains
(of Medina) a sanctuary."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 587:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle said (to her). "Don't you see that
when your folk built the Ka'ba, they did not build it on all the foundations
built by Abraham?" I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Why don't we rebuild it on the
foundations of Abraham?" He said. "But for the fact that your folk have
recently given up infidelity (I would have done so)."
Narrated Ibn Umar: Aisha must have heard this from Allah's Apostle for I see
that Allah's Apostle used not to touch the two corners facing Al-Hijr only
because the House had not been built on the foundations of Abraham''

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 588:
Narrated Abu Humaid As-Sa'idi:
The people asked, "O Allah's Apostle! How shall we (ask Allah to) send
blessings on you?" Allah's Apostle replied, "Say: O Allah! Send Your Mercy on
Muhammad and on his wives and on his off spring, as You sent Your Mercy
on Abraham's family; and send Your Blessings on Muhammad and on his
offspring, as You sent Your Blessings on Abraham's family, for You are the
Most Praise-worthy, the Most Glorious."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 589:
Narrated Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Laila:
Ka'b bin Ujrah met me and said, "Shall I not give you a present I got from the
Prophet?" 'Abdur-Rahman said, "Yes, give it to me." I said, "We asked Allah's
Apostle saying, 'O Allah's Apostle! How should one (ask Allah to) send
blessings on you, the members of the family, for Allah has taught us how to
salute you (in the prayer)?' He said, 'Say: O Allah! Send Your Mercy on
Muhammad and on the family of Muhammad, as You sent Your Mercy on
Abraham and on the family of Abraham, for You are the Most Praise-worthy,
the Most Glorious. O Allah! Send Your Blessings on Muhammad and the
family of Muhammad, as You sent your Blessings on Abraham and on the
family of Abraham, for You are the Most Praise-worthy, the Most Glorious.' "
Volume 4, Book 55, Number 590:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet used to seek Refuge with Allah for Al-Hasan and Al-Husain and
say: "Your forefather (i.e. Abraham) used to seek Refuge with Allah for
Ishmael and Isaac by reciting the following: 'O Allah! I seek Refuge with Your
Perfect Words from every devil and from poisonous pests and from every
evil, harmful, envious eye.' "

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 591:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "We are more liable to be in doubt than Abraham when
he said, 'My Lord! Show me how You give life to the dead." . He (i.e. Allah)
slid: 'Don't you believe then?' He (i.e. Abraham) said: "Yes, but (I ask) in
order to be stronger in Faith." (2.260) And may Allah send His Mercy on Lot!
He wished to have a powerful support. If I were to stay in prison for such a
long time as Joseph did I would have accepted the offer (of freedom
without insisting on having my guiltless less declared)."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 592:
Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa:
The Prophet passed by some persons of the tribe of Aslam practicing
archery (i.e. the throwing of arrows) Allah's Apostle said, "O offspring of
Ishmael! Practice archery (i.e. arrow throwing) as your father was a great
archer (i.e. arrow-thrower). I am with (on the side of) the son of so-and-so-."
Hearing that, one of the two teams stopped throwing. Allah's Apostle asked
them, ' Why are you not throwing?" They replied, "O Allah's Apostle! How
shall we throw when you are with the opposite team?" He said, "Throw, for I
am with you all."
Volume 4, Book 55, Number 593:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Some people asked the Prophet: "Who is the most honorable amongst the
people?" He replied, "The most honorable among them is the one who is the
most Allah-fearing." They said, "O Allah's Prophet! We do not ask about
this." He said, "Then the most honorable person is Joseph, Allah's Prophet,
the son of Allah's Prophet, the son of Allah's Prophet, the son of Allah's
Khalil." They said, "We do not ask about this." He said, "Then you want to
ask me about the Arabs' descent?" They said, "Yes." He said, "Those who
were best in the pre-lslamic period, are the best in Islam, if they comprehend
(the religious knowledge)."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 594:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "May Allah forgive Lot: He wanted to have a powerful
support."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 595:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet recited:-- 'Hal-min-Muddakir' (54.15) (Is there any that will
remember) (and avoid evil).

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 596:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
The Prophet said, "The honorable is the son of the honorable, the son the
honorable, i.e. Joseph, the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of
Abraham
Volume 4, Book 55, Number 597:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle was asked, "Who is the most honorable amongst the
people?" He replied, "The most Allah fearing." The people said, "We do not
want to ask you about this." He said, "The most honorable person is Joseph,
Allah's Prophet, the son of Allah's Prophet, the son of Allah's Prophet, the
son of Allah's Khalil" The people said, 'We do not want to ask you about
this." He said," Then you want to ask me about the origins of the Arabs?
People are of various origins. The best in the pre-lslamic period are the best
in Islam, provided they comprehend (the religious knowledge)."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 598:
Narrated 'Aisha:
That the Prophet said (to her). "Order Abu Bakr to lead the people in
prayer." She replied," Abu Bakr is a soft-hearted person and when he stands
at your place, he will weep (so he will not be able to lead the prayer)." The
Prophet repeated the same order and she gave the same reply. The
narrator, Shuba said that the Prophet said on the third or fourth time. "You
are (like) the female companions of Joseph. Order Abu Bakr to lead the
prayer. "

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 599:
Narrated Abu Musa:
When the Prophet fell ill, he said, "Order Abu Bakr to lead the people in
prayer." 'Aisha said, "Abu Bakr is a soft-hearted person. The Prophet gave
the same order again and she again gave the same reply. He again said,
"Order Abu Bakr (to lead the prayer)! You are (like) the female companions
of Joseph." Consequently Abu Bakr led the people in prayer in the life-time
of the Prophet
Volume 4, Book 55, Number 600:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "O Allah! Save Aiyyash bin Abi Rabia (from the unjust
treatment of the infidels). O Allah! Save Salama bin Hisham. O Allah! Send
your Punishment on (the tribe of) Mudar. O Allah! Let them suffer from
years (of drought) similar to that inflicted during the life-time of Joseph."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 601:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "May Allah bestow His Mercy on Lot. He wanted to
have a powerful support. If I were to stay in prison (for a period equal to)
the stay of Joseph (prison) and then the offer of freedom came to me, then
I would have accepted it." (See Hadith No. 591)

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 602:
Narrated Masruq:
I asked Um Ruman, 'Aisha's mother about the accusation forged against
'Aisha. She said, "While I was sitting with 'Aisha, an Ansari woman came to
us and said, 'Let Allah condemn such-and-such person.' I asked her, 'Why do
you say so?' She replied, 'For he has spread the (slanderous) story.' 'Aisha
said, 'What story?' The woman then told her the story. 'Aisha asked, 'Have
Abu Bakr and Allah's Apostle heard about it ?' She said, 'Yes.' 'Aisha fell
down senseless (on hearing that), and when she came to her senses, she
got fever and shaking of the body. The Prophet came and asked, 'What is
wrong with her?' I said, 'She has got fever because of a story which has been
rumored.' 'Aisha got up and said, 'By Allah! Even if I took an oath, you would
not believe me, and if I put forward an excuse, You would not excuse me.
My example and your example is just like that example of Jacob and his
sons. Against that which you assert, it is Allah (Alone) Whose Help can be
sought.' (12.18) The Prophet left and then Allah revealed the Verses
(concerning the matter), and on that 'Aisha said, 'Thanks to Allah (only) and
not to anybody else."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 603:
Narrated 'Urwa:
I asked 'Aisha the wife of the Prophet about the meaning of the following
Verse: -- "(Respite will be granted) 'Until when the apostles give up hope (of
their people) and thought that they were denied (by their
people)..............."(12.110) 'Aisha replied, "Really, their nations did not believe
them." I said, "By Allah! They were definite that their nations treated them
as liars and it was not a matter of suspecting." 'Aisha said, "O 'Uraiya (i.e.
'Urwa)! No doubt, they were quite sure about it."
I said, "May the Verse be read in such a way as to mean that the apostles
thought that Allah did not help them?" Aisha said, "Allah forbid! (Impossible)
The Apostles did not suspect their Lord of such a thing. But this Verse is
concerned with the Apostles' followers who had faith in their Lord and
believed in their apostles and their period of trials was long and Allah's Help
was delayed till the apostles gave up hope for the conversion of the
disbelievers amongst their nation and suspected that even their followers
were shaken in their belief, Allah's Help then came to them." Narrated Ibn
'Umar: The Prophet said, "The honorable, the son of the honorable, the son
of the honorable, (was) Joseph, the son of Jacob! the son of Isaac, the son
of Abraham."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 604:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "While Job was naked, taking a bath, a swarm of gold
locusts fell on him and he started collecting them in his garment. His Lord
called him, 'O Job! Have I not made you rich enough to need what you see?
He said, 'Yes, O Lord! But I cannot dispense with your Blessing."'
Volume 4, Book 55, Number 605:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet returned to Khadija while his heart was beating rapidly. She
took him to Waraqa bin Naufal who was a Christian convert and used to
read the Gospels in Arabic Waraqa asked (the Prophet), "What do you see?"
When he told him, Waraqa said, "That is the same angel whom Allah sent to
the Prophet) Moses. Should I live till you receive the Divine Message, I will
support you strongly."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 606:
Narrated Malik bin Sasaa:
Allah's Apostle talked to his companions about his Night Journey to the
Heavens. When he reached the fifth Heaven, he met Aaron. (Gabriel said to
the Prophet), "This is Aaron." The Prophet said, "Gabriel greeted and so did
I, and he returned the greeting saying, 'Welcome, O Pious Brother and Pious
Prophet."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 607:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "On the night of my Ascension to Heaven, I saw (the
prophet) Moses who was a thin person with lank hair, looking like one of the
men of the tribe of Shanua; and I saw Jesus who was of average height with
red face as if he had just come out of a bathroom. And I resemble prophet
Abraham more than any of his offspring does. Then I was given two cups,
one containing milk and the other wine. Gabriel said, 'Drink whichever you
like.' I took the milk and drank it. Gabriel said, 'You have accepted what is
natural, (True Religion i.e. Islam) and if you had taken the wine, your
followers would have gone astray.' "
Volume 4, Book 55, Number 608:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "One should not say that I am better than Jonah (i.e.
Yunus) bin Matta." So, he mentioned his father Matta. The Prophet
mentioned the night of his Ascension and said, "The prophet Moses was
brown, a tall person as if from the people of the tribe of Shanu'a. Jesus was
a curly-haired man of moderate height." He also mentioned Malik, the gatekeeper of the (Hell) Fire, and Ad-Dajjal.

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 609:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
When the Prophet came to Medina, he found (the Jews) fasting on the day
of 'Ashura' (i.e. 10th of Muharram). They used to say: "This is a great day on
which Allah saved Moses and drowned the folk of Pharaoh. Moses observed
the fast on this day, as a sign of gratitude to Allah." The Prophet said, "I am
closer to Moses than they." So, he observed the fast (on that day) and
ordered the Muslims to fast on it.

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 610:
Narrated Abu Said:
The Prophet said, 'People will be struck unconscious on the Day of
Resurrection and I will be the first to regain consciousness, and behold!
There I will see Moses holding one of the pillars of Allah's Throne. I will
wonder whether he has become conscious before me of he has been
exempted, because of his unconsciousness at the Tur (mountain) which he
received (on the earth)."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 611:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Were it not for Bani Israel, meat would not decay; and
were it not for Eve, no woman would ever betray her husband."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 612:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
That he differed with Al-Hur bin Qais Al-Fazari regarding the companion of
Moses. Ibn 'Abbas said that he was Al-Khadir. Meanwhile Ubai bin Ka'b
passed by them and Ibn 'Abbas called him saying, "My friend and I have
differed regarding Moses' companion whom Moses asked the way to meet.
Have you heard Allah's Apostle mentioning something about him?" He said,
"Yes, I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'While Moses was sitting in the
company of some Israelites, a man came and asked (him), 'Do you know
anyone who is more learned than you?' Moses replied, 'No.' So, Allah sent
the Divine Inspiration to Moses: 'Yes, Our slave, Khadir (is more learned than
you).' Moses asked how to meet him (i.e. Khadir). So, the fish, was made, as
a sign for him, and he was told that when the fish was lost, he should return
and there he would meet him. So, Moses went on looking for the sign of the
fish in the sea. The servant boy of Moses said to him, 'Do you know that
when we were sitting by the side of the rock, I forgot the fish, and t was
only Satan who made me forget to tell (you) about it.' Moses said, That was
what we were seeking after,' and both of them returned, following their
footmarks and found Khadir; and what happened further to them, is
mentioned in Allah's Book."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 613:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
I said to Ibn Abbas, "Nauf Al-Bukah claims that Moses, the companion of AlKhadir was not Moses (the prophet) of the children of Israel, but some
other Moses." Ibn 'Abbas said, "Allah's enemy (i.e. Nauf) has told a lie. Ubai
bin Ka'b told us that the Prophet said, 'Once Moses stood up and addressed
Bani Israel. He was asked who was the most learned man amongst the
people. He said, 'I.' Allah admonished him as he did not attribute absolute
knowledge to Him (Allah). So, Allah said to him, 'Yes, at the junction of the
two seas there is a Slave of Mine who is more learned than you.' Moses said,
'O my Lord! How can I meet him?' Allah said, 'Take a fish and put it in a large
basket and you will find him at the place where you will lose the fish.' Moses
took a fish and put it in a basket and proceeded along with his (servant) boy,
Yusha 'bin Nun, till they reached the rock where they laid their heads (i.e. lay
down). Moses slept, and the fish, moving out of the basket, fell into the sea.
It took its way into the sea (straight) as in a tunnel. Allah stopped the flow
of water over the fish and it became like an arch (the Prophet pointed out
this arch with his hands). They travelled the rest of the night, and the next
day Moses said to his boy (servant), 'Give us our food, for indeed, we have
suffered much fatigue in this journey of ours.' Moses did not feel tired till he
crossed that place which Allah had ordered him to seek after. His boy
(servant) said to him, 'Do you know that when we were sitting near that
rock, I forgot the fish, and none but Satan caused me to forget to tell (you)
about it, and it took its course into the sea in an amazing way?.' So there was
a path for the fish and that astonished them. Moses said, 'That was what we
were seeking after.' So, both of them retraced their footsteps till they
reached the rock. There they saw a man Lying covered with a garment.
Moses greeted him and he replied saying, 'How do people greet each other
in your land?' Moses said, 'I am Moses.' The man asked, 'Moses of Bani
Israel?' Moses said, 'Yes, I have come to you so that you may teach me from
those things which Allah has taught you.' He said, 'O Moses! I have some of
the Knowledge of Allah which Allah has taught me, and which you do not
know, while you have some of the Knowledge of Allah which Allah has
taught you and which I do not know.' Moses asked, 'May I follow you?' He
said, 'But you will not be able to remain patient with me for how can you be
patient about things which you will not be able to understand?' (Moses said,
'You will find me, if Allah so will, truly patient, and I will not disobey you in
aught.') So, both of them set out walking along the sea-shore, a boat passed
by them and they asked the crew of the boat to take them on board. The
crew recognized Al-Khadir and so they took them on board without fare.
When they were on board the boat, a sparrow came and stood on the edge
of the boat and dipped its beak once or twice into the sea. Al-Khadir said to
Moses, 'O Moses! My knowledge and your knowledge have not decreased
Allah's Knowledge except as much as this sparrow has decreased the water
of the sea with its beak.' Then suddenly Al-Khadir took an adze and plucked
a plank, and Moses did not notice it till he had plucked a plank with the adze.
Moses said to him, 'What have you done? They took us on board charging us
nothing; yet you I have intentionally made a hole in their boat so as to
drown its passengers. Verily, you have done a dreadful thing.' Al-Khadir
replied, 'Did I not tell you that you would not be able to remain patient with
me?' Moses replied, 'Do not blame me for what I have forgotten, and do not
be hard upon me for my fault.' So the first excuse of Moses was that he had
forgotten. When they had left the sea, they passed by a boy playing with
other boys.
Al-Khadir took hold of the boys head and plucked it with his hand like this.
(Sufyan, the sub narrator pointed with his fingertips as if he was plucking
some fruit.) Moses said to him, "Have you killed an innocent person who has
not killed any person? You have really done a horrible thing." Al-Khadir said,
"Did I not tell you that you could not remain patient with me?' Moses said "If
I ask you about anything after this, don't accompany me. You have received
an excuse from me.' Then both of them went on till they came to some
people of a village, and they asked its inhabitant for wood but they refused
to entertain them as guests. Then they saw therein a wall which was just
going to collapse (and Al Khadir repaired it just by touching it with his
hands). (Sufyan, the sub-narrator, pointed with his hands, illustrating how
Al-Khadir passed his hands over the wall upwards.) Moses said, "These are
the people whom we have called on, but they neither gave us food, nor
entertained us as guests, yet you have repaired their wall. If you had wished,
you could have taken wages for it." Al-Khadir said, "This is the parting
between you and me, and I shall tell you the explanation of those things on
which you could not remain patient." The Prophet added, "We wished that
Moses could have remained patient by virtue of which Allah might have told
us more about their story. (Sufyan the sub-narrator said that the Prophet
said, "May Allah bestow His Mercy on Moses! If he had remained patient, we
would have been told further about their case.")
Volume 4, Book 55, Number 614:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Al-Khadir was named so because he sat over a barren
white land, it turned green with plantation after (his sitting over it."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 615:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "It was said to Bani Israel, Enter the gate (of the town)
with humility (prostrating yourselves) and saying: "Repentance", but they
changed the word and entered the town crawling on their buttocks and
saying: "A wheat grain in the hair."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 616:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "(The Prophet) Moses was a shy person and used to
cover his body completely because of his extensive shyness. One of the
children of Israel hurt him by saying, 'He covers his body in this way only
because of some defect in his skin, either leprosy or scrotal hernia, or he has
some other defect.' Allah wished to clear Moses of what they said about
him, so one day while Moses was in seclusion, he took off his clothes and
put them on a stone and started taking a bath. When he had finished the
bath, he moved towards his clothes so as to take them, but the stone took
his clothes and fled; Moses picked up his stick and ran after the stone
saying, 'O stone! Give me my garment!' Till he reached a group of Bani Israel
who saw him naked then, and found him the best of what Allah had created,
and Allah cleared him of what they had accused him of. The stone stopped
there and Moses took and put his garment on and started hitting the stone
with his stick. By Allah, the stone still has some traces of the hitting, three,
four or five marks. This was what Allah refers to in His Saying:-- "O you who
believe! Be you not like those Who annoyed Moses, But Allah proved his
innocence of that which they alleged, And he was honorable In Allah's
Sight." (33.69)

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 617:
Narrated Abdullah:
Once the Prophet distributed something (among his followers. A man said,
"This distribution has not been done (with justice) seeking Allah's
Countenance." I went to the Prophet and told him (of that). He became so
angry that I saw the signs of anger oh his face. Then he said, "May Allah
bestow His Mercy on Moses, for he was harmed more (in a worse manner)
than this; yet he endured patiently."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 618:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
We were with Allah's Apostle picking the fruits of the 'Arak trees, and Allah's
Apostle said, "Pick the black fruit, for it is the best." The companions asked,
"Were you a shepherd?" He replied, "There was no prophet who was not a
shepherd."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 619:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Angel of Death was sent to Moses when he came to Moses, Moses
slapped him on the eye. The angel returned to his Lord and said, "You have
sent me to a Slave who does not want to die." Allah said, "Return to him and
tell him to put his hand on the back of an ox and for every hair that will
come under it, he will be granted one year of life." Moses said, "O Lord!
What will happen after that?" Allah replied, "Then death." Moses said, "Let it
come now." Moses then requested Allah to let him die close to the Sacred
Land so much so that he would be at a distance of a stone's throw from it."
Abu Huraira added, "Allah's Apostle said, 'If I were there, I would show you
his grave below the red sand hill on the side of the road."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 620:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A Muslim and a Jew quarreled. The Muslim taking an oath, said, "By Him
Who has preferred Muhammad over all people...!" The Jew said, "By Him
Who has preferred Moses, over all people." The Muslim raised his hand and
slapped the Jew who came to the Prophet to tell him what had happened
between him and the Muslim. The Prophet said, "Don't give me superiority
over Moses, for the people will become unconscious (on the Day of
Resurrection) and I will be the first to gain consciousness to see Moses
standing and holding a side of Allah's Throne. I will not know if he has been
among those people who have become unconscious; and that he has gained
consciousness before me, or he has been amongst those whom Allah has
exempted."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 621:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Adam and Moses argued with each other. Moses said
to Adam. 'You are Adam whose mistake expelled you from Paradise.' Adam
said to him, 'You are Moses whom Allah selected as His Messenger and as
the one to whom He spoke directly; yet you blame me for a thing which had
already been written in my fate before my creation?"' Allah's Apostle said
twice, "So, Adam overpowered Moses."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 622:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet once came to us and said, "All the nations were displayed in
front of me, and I saw a large multitude of people covering the horizon.
Somebody said, 'This is Moses and his followers.' "

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 623:
Narrated Abu Musa:
Allah's Apostle said, "Many amongst men reached (the level of) perfection
but none amongst the women reached this level except Asia, Pharaoh's
wife, and Mary, the daughter of 'Imran. And no doubt, the superiority of
'Aisha to other women is like the superiority of Tharid (i.e. a meat and bread
dish) to other meals."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 624:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "None of you should say that I am better than Yunus (i.e.
Jonah)." Musadded added, "Jonah bin Matta."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 625:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "No slave (of Allah) should say that I am better than Yunus
bin Matta." So the Prophet mentioned his father's name with his name.

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 626:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Once while a Jew was selling something, he was offered a price that he was
not pleased with. So, he said, "No, by Him Who gave Moses superiority over
all human beings!" Hearing him, an Ansari man got up and slapped him on
the face and said, "You say: By Him Who Gave Moses superiority over all
human beings although the Prophet (Muhammad) is present amongst us!"
The Jew went to the Prophet and said, "O Abu-l-Qasim! I am under the
assurance and contract of security, so what right does so-and-so have to
slap me?" The Prophet asked the other, "Why have you slapped". He told
him the whole story. The Prophet became angry, till anger appeared on his
face, and said, "Don't give superiority to any prophet amongst Allah's
Prophets, for when the trumpet will be blown, everyone on the earth and in
the heavens will become unconscious except those whom Allah will exempt.
The trumpet will be blown for the second time and I will be the first to be
resurrected to see Moses holding Allah's Throne. I will not know whether
the unconsciousness which Moses received on the Day of Tur has been
sufficient for him, or has he got up before me. And I do not say that there is
anybody who is better than Yunus bin Matta."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 627:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "None should say that I am better than Yunus bin Matta."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 628:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The reciting of the Zabur (i.e. Psalms) was made easy for
David. He used to order that his riding animals be saddled, and would finish
reciting the Zabur before they were saddled. And he would never eat except
from the earnings of his manual work."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 629:
Narrated Abdullah bin Amr:
Allah's Apostle was informed that I have said: "By Allah, I will fast all the
days and pray all the nights as long as I live." On that, Allah's Apostle asked
me. "Are you the one who says: 'I will fast all the days and pray all the nights
as long as I live?' " I said, "Yes, I have said it." He said, "You cannot do that.
So fast (sometimes) and do not fast (sometimes). Pray and sleep. Fast for
three days a month, for the reward of a good deed is multiplied by ten time,
and so the fasting of three days a month equals the fasting of a year." I said,
"O Allah's Apostle! I can do (fast) more than this." He said, "Fast on every
third day. I said: I can do (fast) more than that, He said: "Fast on alternate
days and this was the fasting of David which is the most moderate sort of
fasting." I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I can do (fast) more than that." He said,
"There is nothing better than that."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 630:
Narrated Abdullah bin Amr bin Al-As:
The Prophet said to me, "I have been informed that you pray all the nights
and observe fast all the days; is this true?" I replied, "Yes." He said, "If you
do so, your eyes will become weak and you will get bored. So fast three days
a month, for this will be the fasting of a whole year, or equal to the fasting
of a whole year." I said, "I find myself able to fast more." He said, "Then fast
like the fasting of (the Prophet) David who used to fast on alternate days
and would not flee on facing the enemy."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 631:
Narrated Abdullah bin Amr:
Allah's Apostle said to me, "The most beloved fasting to Allah was the
fasting of (the Prophet) David who used to fast on alternate days. And the
most beloved prayer to Allah was the prayer of David who used to sleep for
(the first) half of the night and pray for 1/3 of it and (again) sleep for a sixth
of it."
Volume 4, Book 55, Number 632:
Narrated Mujahid:
I asked Ibn 'Abbas, "Should we perform a prostration on reciting Surat-Sad?"
He recited (the Sura) including: 'And among his progeny, David,
Solomon..(up to)...so follow their guidance (6.84-91) And then he said,
"Your Prophet is amongst those people who have been ordered to follow
them (i.e. the preceding apostles).

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 633:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The prostration in Sura-Sad is not amongst the compulsory prostrations,
though I saw the Prophet prostrating on reciting The Statement of Allah:-and to David We gave Solomon (for a son). How excellent (a) slave he was
ever oft-returning in repentance (to us) (38.30) And His Statement:-- He said:
My Lord Forgive me and grant me a kingdom such as shall not belong to any
other after me.' (38.35) And His Statement:-- 'And they followed what the
Devils gave out (falsely), of magic in the life-time of Solomon.' (2.102)

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 634:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "A strong demon from the Jinns came to me yesterday
suddenly, so as to spoil my prayer, but Allah enabled me to overpower him,
and so I caught him and intended to tie him to one of the pillars of the
Mosque so that all of you might see him, but I remembered the invocation
of my brother Solomon: 'And grant me a kingdom such as shall not belong
to any other after me.' (38.35) so I let him go cursed."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 635:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Solomon (the son of) David said, 'Tonight I will sleep with
seventy ladies each of whom will conceive a child who will be a knight
fighting for "Allah's Cause.' His companion said, 'If Allah will.' But Solomon
did not say so; therefore none of those women got pregnant except one
who gave birth to a half child." The Prophet further said, "If the Prophet
Solomon had said it (i.e. 'If Allah will') he would have begotten children who
would have fought in Allah's Cause." Shuaib and Ibn Abi Az-Zinad said,
"Ninety (women) is more correct (than seventy)."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 636:
Narrated Abu Dhaar:
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Which mosque was built first?" He replied, "AlMasjid-ul-Haram." I asked, "Which (was built) next?" He replied, "Al-Masjidul-Aqs-a (i.e. Jerusalem)." I asked, "What was the period in between them?"
He replied, "Forty (years)." He then added, "Wherever the time for the
prayer comes upon you, perform the prayer, for all the earth is a place of
worshipping for you."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 637:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "My example and the example o the people is like that
of a person who lit a fire and let the moths, butterflies and these insects fall
in it." He also said, "There were two women, each of whom had a child with
her. A wolf came and took away the child of one of them, whereupon the
other said, 'It has taken your child.' The first said, 'But it has taken your
child.' So they both carried the case before David who judged that the living
child be given to the elder lady. So both of them went to Solomon bin David
and informed him (of the case). He said, 'Bring me a knife so as to cut the
child into two pieces and distribute it between them.' The younger lady said,
'May Allah be merciful to you! Don't do that, for it is her (i.e. the other
lady's) child.' So he gave the child to the younger lady."
Volume 4, Book 55, Number 638:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
When the Verse:-- 'Those who believe and mix not their belief with wrong."
was revealed, the companions of the Prophet said, "Who amongst us has
not mixed his belief with wrong?" Then Allah revealed: "Join none in
worship with Allah, Verily joining others in worship with Allah is a great
wrong indeed."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 639:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
When the Verse:-- 'Those who believe and mix not their belief with wrong.'
was revealed, the Muslims felt it very hard on them and said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Who amongst us does not do wrong to himself?" He replied, "The
Verse does not mean this. But that (wrong) means to associate others in
worship to Allah: Don't you listen to what Luqman said to his son when he
was advising him," O my son! Join not others in worship with Allah. Verily
joining others in worship with Allah is a great wrong indeed." (31.13)

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 640:
Narrated Malik bin Sasaa:
That the Prophet talked to them about the night of his Ascension to the
Heavens. He said, "(Then Gabriel took me) and ascended up till he reached
the second heaven where he asked for the gate to be opened, but it was
asked, 'Who is it?' Gabriel replied, 'I am Gabriel.' It was asked, 'Who is
accompanying you?' He replied, 'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has he been
called?' He said, 'Yes.' When we reached over the second heaven, I saw
Yahya (i.e. John) and Jesus who were cousins. Gabriel said, 'These are John
(Yahya) and Jesus, so greet them.' I greeted them and they returned the
greeting saying, 'Welcome, O Pious Brother and Pious Prophet!;' "
Volume 4, Book 55, Number 641:
Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab:
Abu Huraira said, "I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'There is none born among
the off-spring of Adam, but Satan touches it. A child therefore, cries loudly
at the time of birth because of the touch of Satan, except Mary and her
child." Then Abu Huraira recited: "And I seek refuge with You for her and for
her offspring from the outcast Satan" (3.36)

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 642:
Narrated 'Ali:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Mary, the daughter of 'Imran, was the best
among the women (of the world of her time) and Khadija is the best
amongst the women. (of this nation)."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 643:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari:
The Prophet said, "The superiority of 'Aisha to other ladies is like the
superiority of Tharid (i.e. meat and bread dish) to other meals. Many men
reached the level of perfection, but no woman reached such a level except
Mary, the daughter of Imran and Asia, the wife of Pharaoh."
Narrated Abu Huraira: I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Amongst all those
women who ride camels (i.e. Arabs), the ladies of Quraish are the best. They
are merciful and kind to their off-spring and the best guardians of their
husbands' properties.' Abu Huraira added, "Mary the daughter of Imran
never rode a camel."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 644:
Narrated 'Ubada:
The Prophet said, "If anyone testifies that None has the right to be
worshipped but Allah Alone Who has no partners, and that Muhammad is
His Slave and His Apostle, and that Jesus is Allah's Slave and His Apostle and
His Word which He bestowed on Mary and a Spirit created by Him, and that
Paradise is true, and Hell is true, Allah will admit him into Paradise with the
deeds which he had done even if those deeds were few." (Junada, the subnarrator said, " 'Ubada added, 'Such a person can enter Paradise through
any of its eight gates he likes.")

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 645:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "None spoke in cradle but three: (The first was) Jesus,
(the second was), there a man from Bani Israel called Juraij. While he was
offering his prayers, his mother came and called him. He said (to himself),
'Shall I answer her or keep on praying?" (He went on praying) and did not
answer her, his mother said, "O Allah! Do not let him die till he sees the faces
of prostitutes." So while he was in his hermitage, a lady came and sought to
seduce him, but he refused. So she went to a shepherd and presented
herself to him to commit illegal sexual intercourse with her and then later
she gave birth to a child and claimed that it belonged to Juraij. The people,
therefore, came to him and dismantled his hermitage and expelled him out
of it and abused him. Juraij performed the ablution and offered prayer, and
then came to the child and said, 'O child! Who is your father?' The child
replied, 'The shepherd.' (After hearing this) the people said, 'We shall
rebuild your hermitage of gold,' but he said, 'No, of nothing but mud.'(The
third was the hero of the following story) A lady from Bani Israel was
nursing her child at her breast when a handsome rider passed by her. She
said, 'O Allah ! Make my child like him.' On that the child left her breast, and
facing the rider said, 'O Allah! Do not make me like him.' The child then
started to suck her breast again. (Abu Huraira further said, "As if I were now
looking at the Prophet sucking his finger (in way of demonstration.") After a
while the people passed by, with a lady slave and she (i.e. the child's
mother) said, 'O Allah! Do not make my child like this (slave girl)!, On that
the child left her breast and said, 'O Allah! Make me like her.' When she
asked why, the child replied, 'The rider is one of the tyrants while this slave
girl is falsely accused of theft and illegal sexual intercourse."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 646:
Narrated Hisham:
from Ma'mar as below.

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 647:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "I met Moses on the night of my Ascension to heaven."
The Prophet then described him saying, as I think, "He was a tall person with
lank hair as if he belonged to the people of the tribe of Shanu's.' The
Prophet further said, "I met Jesus." The Prophet described him saying, "He
was one of moderate height and was red-faced as if he had just come out of
a bathroom. I saw Abraham whom I resembled more than any of his children
did." The Prophet further said, "(That night) I was given two cups; one full of
milk and the other full of wine. I was asked to take either of them which I
liked, and I took the milk and drank it. On that it was said to me, 'You have
taken the right path (religion). If you had taken the wine, your (Muslim)
nation would have gone astray."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 648:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
The Prophet said, "I saw Moses, Jesus and Abraham (on the night of my
Ascension to the heavens). Jesus was of red complexion, curly hair and a
broad chest. Moses was of brown complexion, straight hair and tall stature
as if he was from the people of Az-Zutt."
Volume 4, Book 55, Number 649:
Narrated Abdullah:
The Prophet mentioned the Massiah Ad-Dajjal in front of the people saying,
Allah is not one eyed while Messsiah, Ad-Dajjal is blind in the right eye and
his eye looks like a bulging out grape. While sleeping near the Ka'ba last
night, I saw in my dream a man of brown color the best one can see
amongst brown color and his hair was long that it fell between his
shoulders. His hair was lank and water was dribbling from his head and he
was placing his hands on the shoulders of two men while circumambulating
the Kaba. I asked, 'Who is this?' They replied, 'This is Jesus, son of Mary.'
Behind him I saw a man who had very curly hair and was blind in the right
eye, resembling Ibn Qatan (i.e. an infidel) in appearance. He was placing his
hands on the shoulders of a person while performing Tawaf around the
Ka'ba. I asked, 'Who is this? 'They replied, 'The Masih, Ad-Dajjal.' "

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 650:
Narrated Salim from his father:
No, By Allah, the Prophet did not tell that Jesus was of red complexion but
said, "While I was asleep circumambulating the Ka'ba (in my dream),
suddenly I saw a man of brown complexion and lank hair walking between
two men, and water was dropping from his head. I asked, 'Who is this?' The
people said, 'He is the son of Mary.' Then I looked behind and I saw a redcomplexioned, fat, curly-haired man, blind in the right eye which looked like
a bulging out grape. I asked, 'Who is this?' They replied, 'He is Ad-Dajjal.' The
one who resembled to him among the people, was Ibn Qatar." (Az-Zuhri
said, "He (i.e. Ibn Qatan) was a man from the tribe Khuza'a who died in the
pre-lslamic period.")

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 651:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "I am the nearest of all the people to the son
of Mary, and all the prophets are paternal brothers, and there has been no
prophet between me and him (i.e. Jesus)."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 652:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Both in this world and in the Hereafter, I am the
nearest of all the people to Jesus, the son of Mary. The prophets are
paternal brothers; their mothers are different, but their religion is one."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 653:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Jesus, seeing a man stealing, asked him, 'Did you steal?,
He said, 'No, by Allah, except Whom there is None who has the right to be
worshipped' Jesus said, 'I believe in Allah and suspect my eyes."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 654:
Narrated 'Umar:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Do not exaggerate in praising me as the
Christians praised the son of Mary, for I am only a Slave. So, call me the Slave
of Allah and His Apostle."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 655:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari:
Allah's Apostle said, "If a person teaches his slave girl good manners
properly, educates her properly, and then manumits and marries her, he will
get a double reward. And if a man believes in Jesus and then believes in me,
he will get a double reward. And if a slave fears his Lord (i.e. Allah) and
obeys his masters, he too will get a double reward."

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 656:
Narrted Ibn Abbas:
Allah's Apostle said, "You will be resurrected (and assembled) bare-footed,
naked and uncircumcised." The Prophet then recited the Divine Verse:-- "As
We began the first creation, We shall repeat it: A promise We have
undertaken. Truly we shall do it." (21.104)
He added, "The first to be dressed will be Abraham. Then some of my
companions will take to the right and to the left. I will say: 'My companions!
'It will be said, 'They had been renegades since you left them.' I will then say
what the Pious Slave Jesus, the son of Mary said: 'And I was a witness over
them while I dwelt amongst them; when You did take me up, You were the
Watcher over them, and You are a Witness to all things. If You punish them,
they are Your slaves, and if you forgive them, You, only You are the AllMighty the All-Wise.' " (5.117-118) Narrated Quaggas, "Those were the
apostates who renegade from Islam during the Caliphate of Abu Bakr who
fought them".

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 657:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "By Him in Whose Hands my soul is, surely (Jesus,) the
son of Mary will soon descend amongst you and will judge mankind justly
(as a Just Ruler); he will break the Cross and kill the pigs and there will be no
Jizya (i.e. taxation taken from non Muslims).
Money will be in abundance so that nobody will accept it, and a single
prostration to Allah (in prayer) will be better than the whole world and
whatever is in it." Abu Huraira added "If you wish, you can recite (this verse
of the Holy Book): -'And there is none Of the people of the Scriptures (Jews and Christians) But
must believe in him (i.e Jesus as an Apostle of Allah and a human being)
Before his death. And on the Day of Judgment He will be a witness Against
them." (4.159) (See Fateh Al Bari, Page 302 Vol 7)

Volume 4, Book 55, Number 658:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said "How will you be when the son of Mary (i.e. Jesus)
descends amongst you and he will judge people by the Law of the Quran
and not by the law of Gospel (Fateh-ul Bari page 304 and 305 Vol 7)
BOOK 56. VIRTUES AND MERITS OF THE PROPHET (PBUH) AND HIS COMPANIONS (659-841)
Volume 4, Book 56, Number 659:
Narrated Rabi bin Hirash:
'Uqba bin 'Amr said to Hudhaifa, "Won't you relate to us of what you have
heard from Allah's Apostle ?" He said, "I heard him saying, "When Al-Dajjal
appears, he will have fire and water along with him. What the people will
consider as cold water, will be fire that will burn (things). So, if anyone of
you comes across this, he should fall in the thing which will appear to him as
fire, for in reality, it will be fresh cold water." Hudhaifa added, "I also heard
him saying, 'From among the people preceding your generation, there was a
man whom the angel of death visited to capture his soul. (So his soul was
captured) and he was asked if he had done any good deed.' He replied, 'I
don't remember any good deed.' He was asked to think it over. He said, 'I do
not remember, except that I used to trade with the people in the world and
I used to give a respite to the rich and forgive the poor (among my debtors).
So Allah made him enter Paradise." Hudhaifa further said, "I also heard him
saying, 'Once there was a man on his death-bed, who, losing every hope of
surviving said to his family: When I die, gather for me a large heap of wood
and make a fire (to burn me). When the fire eats my meat and reaches my
bones, and when the bones burn, take and crush them into powder and wait
for a windy day to throw it (i.e. the powder) over the sea. They did so, but
Allah collected his particles and asked him:
Why did you do so? He replied: For fear of You. So Allah forgave him." 'Uqba
bin 'Amr said, "I heard him saying that the Israeli used to dig the grave of the
dead (to steal their shrouds)."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 660:
Narrated 'Aisha and Ibn 'Abbas:
On his death-bed Allah's Apostle put a sheet over his-face and when he felt
hot, he would remove it from his face. When in that state (of putting and
removing the sheet) he said, "May Allah's Curse be on the Jews and the
Christians for they build places of worship at the graves of their prophets."
(By that) he intended to warn (the Muslim) from what they (i.e. Jews and
Christians) had done.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 661:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The Israelis used to be ruled and guided by prophets:
Whenever a prophet died, another would take over his place. There will be
no prophet after me, but there will be Caliphs who will increase in number."
The people asked, "O Allah's Apostle! What do you order us (to do)?" He
said, "Obey the one who will be given the pledge of allegiance first. Fulfil
their (i.e. the Caliphs) rights, for Allah will ask them about (any shortcoming)
in ruling those Allah has put under their guardianship."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 662:
Narrated Abu Said:
The Prophet said, "You will follow the wrong ways, of your predecessors so
completely and literally that if they should go into the hole of a mastigure,
you too will go there." We said, "O Allah's Apostle! Do you mean the Jews
and the Christians?" He replied, "Whom else?" (Meaning, of course, the Jews
and the Christians.)

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 663:
Narrated Anas:
The people mentioned the fire and the bell (as means proposed for
announcing the time of prayer) and by such a suggestion they referred to
the Jews and the Christians. But Bilal was ordered, "Pronounce the words of
the Adhan (i.e. call for the prayer) twice and the Iqama once only."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 664:
Narrated 'Aisha:
That she used to hate that one should keep his hands on his flanks while
praying. She said that the Jew used to do so.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 665:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Your period (i.e. the Muslims' period) in comparison to
the periods of the previous nations, is like the period between the 'Asr
prayer and sunset. And your example in comparison to the Jews and the
Christians is like the example of a person who employed some laborers and
asked them, 'Who will work for me till midday for one Qirat each?' The Jews
worked for half a day for one Qirat each. The person asked, 'Who will do the
work for me from midday to the time of the 'Asr (prayer) for one Qirat
each?' The Christians worked from midday till the 'Asr prayer for one Qirat.
Then the person asked, 'Who will do the work for me from the 'Asr till
sunset for two Qirats each?' " The Prophet added, "It is you (i.e. Muslims)
who are doing the work from the Asr till sunset, so you will have a double
reward. The Jews and the Christians got angry and said, 'We have done
more work but got less wages.' Allah said, 'Have I been unjust to you as
regards your rights?' They said, 'No.' So Allah said, 'Then it is My Blessing
which I bestow on whomever I like. "

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 666:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
I heard 'Umar saying, "May Allah Curse so-and-so! Doesn't he know that the
Prophet said, 'May Allah curse the Jews for, though they were forbidden (to
eat) fat, they liquefied it and sold it. "

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 667:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
The Prophet said, "Convey (my teachings) to the people even if it were a
single sentence, and tell others the stories of Bani Israel (which have been
taught to you), for it is not sinful to do so. And whoever tells a lie on me
intentionally, will surely take his place in the (Hell) Fire."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 668:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The Jews and the Christians do not dye (their grey
hair), so you shall do the opposite of what they do (i.e. dye your grey hair
and beards)."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 669:
Narrated Jundub:
Allah's Apostle said, "Amongst the nations before you there was a man who
got a wound, and growing impatient (with its pain), he took a knife and cut
his hand with it and the blood did not stop till he died. Allah said, 'My Slave
hurried to bring death upon himself so I have forbidden him (to enter)
Paradise.' "

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 670:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
that he heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Allah willed to test three Israelis who
were a Leper, a blind man and a bald-headed man. So, he sent them an angel
who came to the leper and said, 'What thing do you like most?' He replied,
"Good color and good skin, for the people have a strong aversion to me.'
The angel touched him and his illness was cured, and he was given a good
color and beautiful skin. The angel asked him, 'What kind of property do you
like best?' He replied, 'Camels (or cows).' (The narrator is in doubt, for either
the leper or the bald-headed man demanded camels and the other
demanded cows.) So he (i.e. the leper) was given a pregnant she-camei, and
the angel said (to him), 'May Allah bless you in it.'
The angel then went to the bald-headed man and said, 'What thing do you
like most?' He said, 'I like good hair and wish to be cured of this disease, for
the people feel repulsion for me.' The angel touched him and his illness was
cured, and he was given good hair. The angel asked (him), 'What kind of
property do you like bests' He replied, 'Cows,' The angel gave him a
pregnant cow and said, 'May Allah bless you in it.' The angel went to the
blind man and asked, 'What thing do you like best?' He said, '(I like) that
Allah may restore my eye-sight to me so that I may see the people.' The
angel touched his eyes and Allah gave him back his eye-sight. The angel
asked him, "What kind of property do you like best?' He replied, 'Sheep.' The
angel gave him a pregnant sheep. Afterwards, all the three pregnant
animals gave birth to young ones, and multiplied and brought forth so much
that one of the (three) men had a herd of camels filling a valley, and one had
a herd of cows filling a valley, and one had a flock of sheep filling a valley.
Then the angel, disguised in the shape and appearance of a leper, went to
the leper and said, I am a poor man, who has lost all means of livelihood
while on a journey. So none will satisfy my need except Allah and then you.
In the Name of Him Who has given you such nice color and beautiful skin,
and so much property, I ask you to give me a camel so that I may reach my
destination. The man replied, 'I have many obligations (so I cannot give
you).' The angel said, 'I think I know you; were you not a leper to whom the
people had a strong aversion? Weren't you a poor man, and then Allah gave
you (all this property).' He replied, '(This is all wrong), I got this property
through inheritance from my fore-fathers' The angel said, 'If you are telling a
lie, then let Allah make you as you were before. '
Then the angel, disguised in the shape and appearance of a bald man, went
to the bald man and said to him the same as he told the first one, and he too
answered the same as the first one did. The angel said, 'If you are telling a
lie, then let Allah make you as you were before.'
The angel, disguised in the shape of a blind man, went to the blind man and
said, 'I am a poor man and a traveler, whose means of livelihood have been
exhausted while on a journey. I have nobody to help me except Allah, and
after Him, you yourself. I ask you in the Name of Him Who has given you
back your eye-sight to give me a sheep, so that with its help, I may complete
my journey' The man said, 'No doubt, I was blind and Allah gave me back my
eye-sight; I was poor and Allah made me rich; so take anything you wish
from my property. By Allah, I will not stop you for taking anything (you
need) of my property which you may take for Allah's sake.' The angel
replied, 'Keep your property with you. You (i.e 3 men) have been tested and
Allah is pleased with you and is angry with your two companions."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 671:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Once three persons (from the previous nations) were
traveling, and suddenly it started raining and they took shelter in a cave. The
entrance of the cave got closed while they were inside. They said to each
other, 'O you! Nothing can save you except the truth, so each of you should
ask Allah's Help by referring to such a deed as he thinks he did sincerely (i.e.
just for gaining Allah's Pleasure).' So one of them said, 'O Allah! You know
that I had a laborer who worked for me for one Faraq (i.e. three Sas) of rice,
but he departed, leaving it (i.e. his wages). I sowed that Faraq of rice and
with its yield I bought cows (for him). Later on when he came to me asking
for his wages, I said (to him), 'Go to those cows and drive them away.' He
said to me, 'But you have to pay me only a Faraq of rice,' I said to him, 'Go to
those cows and take them, for they are the product of that Faraq (of rice).'
So he drove them. O Allah! If you consider that I did that for fear of You,
then please remove the rock.' The rock shifted a bit from the mouth of the
cave. The second one said, 'O Allah, You know that I had old parents whom I
used to provide with the milk of my sheep every night. One night I was
delayed and when I came, they had slept, while my wife and children were
crying with hunger. I used not to let them (i.e. my family) drink unless my
parents had drunk first. So I disliked to wake them up and also disliked that
they should sleep without drinking it, I kept on waiting (for them to wake)
till it dawned. O Allah! If You consider that I did that for fear of you, then
please remove the rock.' So the rock shifted and they could see the sky
through it. The (third) one said, 'O Allah! You know that I had a cousin (i.e.
my paternal uncle's daughter) who was most beloved to me and I sought to
seduce her, but she refused, unless I paid her one-hundred Dinars (i.e. gold
pieces). So I collected the amount and brought it to her, and she allowed me
to sleep with her. But when I sat between her legs, she said, 'Be afraid of
Allah, and do not deflower me but legally. 'I got up and left the hundred
Dinars (for her). O Allah! If You consider that I did that for fear of you than
please remove the rock. So Allah saved them and they came out (of the
cave)." (This Hadith indicates that one can only ask Allah for help directly or
through his performed good deeds. But to ask Allah through dead or absent
prophets, saints, spirits, holy men, angels etc. is absolutely forbidden in
Islam and it is a kind of disbelief.)

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 672:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
That he heard Allah's Apostle saying, "While a lady was nursing her child, a
rider passed by and she said, 'O Allah! Don't let my child die till he becomes
like this (rider).' The child said, 'O Allah! Don't make me like him,' and then
returned to her breast (sucking it). (After a while) they passed by a lady who
was being pulled and teased (by the people). The child's mother said, 'O
Allah! Do not make my child like her.' The child said, 'O Allah! Make me like
her.' Then he said, 'As for the rider, he is an infidel, while the lady is accused
of illegal sexual intercourse (falsely) and she says: Allah is sufficient for me
(He knows the truth)."
Volume 4, Book 56, Number 673:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "While a dog was going round a well and was about to die
of thirst, an Israeli prostitute saw it and took off her shoe and watered it. So
Allah forgave her because of that good deed."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 674:
Narrated Humaid bin 'Abdur-Rahman:
That he heard Muawiya bin Abi Sufyan (talking) on the pulpit in the year
when he performed the Hajj. He took a tuft of hair that was in the hand of
an orderly and said, "O people of Medina! Where are your learned men? I
heard the Prophet forbidding such a thing as this (i.e. false hair) and he used
to say, 'The Israelis were destroyed when their ladies practiced this habit (of
using false hair to lengthen their locks)."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 675:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Amongst the people preceding you there used to be
'Muhaddithun' (i.e. persons who can guess things that come true later on, as
if those persons have been inspired by a divine power), and if there are any
such persons amongst my followers, it is 'Umar bin Al-Khattab."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 676:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said, "Amongst the men of Bani Israel there was a man who
had murdered ninety-nine persons. Then he set out asking (whether his
repentance could be accepted or not). He came upon a monk and asked him
if his repentance could be accepted. The monk replied in the negative and so
the man killed him. He kept on asking till a man advised to go to such and
such village. (So he left for it) but death overtook him on the way. While
dying, he turned his chest towards that village (where he had hoped his
repentance would be accepted), and so the angels of mercy and the angels
of punishment quarrelled amongst themselves regarding him. Allah ordered
the village (towards which he was going) to come closer to him, and
ordered the village (whence he had come), to go far away, and then He
ordered the angels to measure the distances between his body and the two
villages. So he was found to be one span closer to the village (he was going
to). So he was forgiven."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 677:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Once Allah's Apostle; offered the morning prayer and then faced the people
and said, "While a man was driving a cow, he suddenly rode over it and beat
it. The cow said, "We have not been created for this, but we have been
created for sloughing." On that the people said astonishingly, "Glorified be
Allah! A cow speaks!" The Prophet said, "I believe this, and Abu Bakr and
'Umar too, believe it, although neither of them was present there. While a
person was amongst his sheep, a wolf attacked and took one of the sheep.
The man chased the wolf till he saved it from the wolf, where upon the wolf
said, 'You have saved it from me; but who will guard it on the day of the wild
beasts when there will be no shepherd to guard them except me (because
of riots and afflictions)? ' " The people said surprisingly, "Glorified be Allah! A
wolf speaks!" The Prophet said, "But I believe this, and Abu Bakr and 'Umar
too, believe this, although neither of them was present there." (See the
Foot-note of page No. 10 Vol.5)

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 678:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "A man bought a piece of and from another man, and
the buyer found an earthenware jar filled with gold in the land. The buyer
said to the seller. 'Take your gold, as I have bought only the land from you,
but I have not bought the gold from you.' The (former) owner of the land
said, "I have sold you the land with everything in it.' So both of them took
their case before a man who asked, 'Do you have children?' One of them
said, "I have a boy.' The other said, "I have a girl.' The man said, 'Marry the
girl to the boy and spend the money on both of them and give the rest of it
in charity.' "

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 679:
Narrated Usama bin Zaid:
Allah's Apostle said, "Plague was a means of torture sent on a group of
Israelis (or on some people before you). So if you hear of its spread in a land,
don't approach it, and if a plague should appear in a land where you are
present, then don't leave that land in order to run away from it (i.e.
plague)."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 680:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) I asked Allah's Apostle about the plague. He told
me that it was a Punishment sent by Allah on whom he wished, and Allah
made it a source of mercy for the believers, for if one in the time of an
epidemic plague stays in his country patiently hoping for Allah's Reward and
believing that nothing will befall him except what Allah has written for him,
he will get the reward of a martyr."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 681:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The people of Quraish worried about the lady from Bani Makhzum who had
committed theft. They asked, "Who will intercede for her with Allah's
Apostle?" Some said, "No one dare to do so except Usama bin Zaid the
beloved one to Allah's Apostle ." When Usama spoke about that to Allah's
Apostle Allah's Apostle said, (to him), "Do you try to intercede for
somebody in a case connected with Allah's Prescribed Punishments?" Then
he got up and delivered a sermon saying, "What destroyed the nations
preceding you, was that if a noble amongst them stole, they would forgive
him, and if a poor person amongst them stole, they would inflict Allah's
Legal punishment on him. By Allah, if Fatima, the daughter of Muhammad
stole, I would cut off her hand."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 682:
Narrated Ibn Mas'ud:
I heard a person reciting a (Quranic) Verse in a certain way, and I had heard
the Prophet reciting the same Verse in a different way. So I took him to the
Prophet and informed him of that but I noticed the sign of disapproval on
his face, and then he said, "Both of you are correct, so don't differ, for the
nations before you differed, so they were destroyed."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 683:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
As if I saw the Prophet talking about one of the prophets whose nation had
beaten him and caused him to bleed, while he was cleaning the blood off his
face and saying, "O Allah! Forgive my nation, for they have no knowledge."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 684:
Narrated Abu Sa'id:
The Prophet said, "Amongst the people preceding your age, there was a
man whom Allah had given a lot of money. While he was in his death-bed, he
called his sons and said, 'What type of father have I been to you? They
replied, 'You have been a good father.' He said, 'I have never done a single
good deed; so when I die, burn me, crush my body, and scatter the resulting
ashes on a windy day.' His sons did accordingly, but Allah gathered his
particles and asked (him), 'What made you do so?' He replied, "Fear of you.'
So Allah bestowed His Mercy upon him. (forgave him)."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 685:
Narrated Ribi bin Hirash:
'Uqba said to Hudhaifa, "Won't you narrate to us what you heard from
Allah's Apostle ?" Hudhaifa said, "I heard him saying, 'Death approached a
man and when he had no hope of surviving, he said to his family, 'When I
die, gather for me much wood and build a fire (to burn me),. When the fire
has eaten my flesh and reached my bones, take the bones and grind them
and scatter the resulting powder in the sea on a hot (or windy) day.' (That
was done.) But Allah collected his particles and asked (him), 'Why did you do
so?' He replied, 'For fear of You.' So Allah forgave him."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 686:
Narrated 'Abdu Malik:
as above, saying, "On a windy day."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 687:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "A man used to give loans to the people and used to say
to his servant, 'If the debtor is poor, forgive him, so that Allah may forgive
us.' So when he met Allah (after his death), Allah forgave him."
Volume 4, Book 56, Number 688:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "A man used to do sinful deeds, and when death came to
him, he said to his sons, 'After my death, burn me and then crush me, and
scatter the powder in the air, for by Allah, if Allah has control over me, He
will give me such a punishment as He has never given to anyone else.' When
he died, his sons did accordingly. Allah ordered the earth saying, 'Collect
what you hold of his particles.' It did so, and behold! There he was (the man)
standing. Allah asked (him), 'What made you do what you did?' He replied,
'O my Lord! I was afraid of You.' So Allah forgave him. " Another narrator
said "The man said, Fear of You, O Lord!"

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 689:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "A lady was punished because of a cat which she had
imprisoned till it died. She entered the (Hell) Fire because of it, for she
neither gave it food nor water as she had imprisoned it, nor set it free to eat
from the vermin of the earth."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 690:
Narrated Abu Masud Uqba:
The Prophet said, "One of the sayings of the prophets which the people
have got, is. 'If you do not feel ashamed, then do whatever you like."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 691:
Narrated Abu Mus'ud:
The Prophet said, "One of the sayings of the prophets which the people
have got is, 'If you do not feel ashamed, then do whatever you like."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 692:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
The Prophet said, "While a man was walking, dragging his dress with pride,
he was caused to be swallowed by the earth and will go on sinking in it till
the Day of Resurrection."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 693:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "We are the last (to come) but we will be the foremost on
the Day of Resurrection, nations were given the Book (i.e. Scripture) before
us, and we were given the Holy Book after them. This (i.e. Friday) is the day
about which they differed. So the next day (i.e. Saturday) was prescribed for
the Jews and the day after it (i.e. Sunday) for the Christians. It is incumbent
on every Muslim to wash his head and body on a Day (i.e. Friday) (at least) in
every seven days."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 694:
Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab:
When Muawiya bin Abu Sufyan came to Medina for the last time, he
delivered a sermon before us. He took out a tuft of hair and said, "I never
thought that someone other than the Jews would do such a thing (i.e. use
false hair). The Prophet named such a practice, 'Az-Zur' (i.e. falsehood),"
meaning the use of false hair.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 695:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Regarding the Verse: 'And (We) made you into Shu'ub and Qabail-- (49.13)
that Shu'uib means the big Qabail (i.e. nations) while the Qabail (i.e. tribes)
means the branch tribes.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 696:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Once Allah's Apostle was asked, "Who is the most honorable amongst the
people?" He said, "The most righteous (i.e. Allah-fearing) amongst you."
They said, "We do not ask you about this." He said, "Then Joseph, the
prophet of Allah."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 697:
Narrated Kulaib bin Wail:
I asked Zainab bint Abi Salama (i.e. daughter of the wife of the Prophet, "Tell
me about the Prophet . Did he belong to the tribe of Mudar?" She replied,
"Yes, he belonged to the tribe of Mudar and was from the offspring of AnNadr bin Kinana."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 698:
Narrated Kulaib:
I was told by the Rabiba (i.e. daughter of the wife of the Prophet) who, I
think, was Zainab, that the Prophet (forbade the utensils (of wine called) AdDubba, Al-Hantam, Al-Muqaiyar and Al-Muzaffat. I said to her, 'Tell me as to
which tribe the Prophet belonged; was he from the tribe of Mudar?'' She
replied, "He belonged to the tribe of Mudar and was from the offspring of
An-Nadr bin Kinana. "
Volume 4, Book 56, Number 699:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "You see that the people are of different natures. Those
who were the best in the pre-lslamic period, are also the best in Islam if they
comprehend religious knowledge. You see that the best amongst the
people in this respect (i.e. ambition of ruling) are those who hate it most.
And you see that the worst among people is the double faced (person) who
appears to these with one face and to the others with another face (i.e a
hypocrite)."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 700:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The tribe of Quraish has precedence over the people in
this connection (i.e the right of ruling). The Muslims follow the Muslims
amongst them, and the infidels follow the infidels amongst them. People are
of different natures: The best amongst them in the pre-lslamic period are
the best in Islam provided they comprehend the religious knowledge. You
will find that the best amongst the people in this respect (i.e. of ruling) is he
who hates it (i.e. the idea of ruling) most, till he is given the pledge of
allegiance."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 701:
Narrated Tawus:
Ibn 'Abbas recited the Quranic Verse:--'Except to be kind to me for my kinship to you--" (42.23) Said bin Jubair said, "(The Verse implies) the kinship of
Muhammad." Ibn 'Abbas said, "There was not a single house (i.e. sub-tribe)
of Quraish but had a kinship to the Prophet and so the above Verse was
revealed in this connection, and its interpretation is: 'O Quraish! You should
keep good relation between me (i.e. Muhammad) and you."
Volume 4, Book 56, Number 702:
Narrated Abi Mas'ud:
The Prophet said, "From this side from the east, afflictions will appear.
Rudeness and lack of mercy are characteristics of the rural bedouins who
are busy with their camels and cows (and pay no attention to religion). Such
are the tribes of Rabi'a and Mudar."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 703:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Pride and arrogance are characteristics of
the rural bedouins while calmness is found among the owners of sheep.
Belief is Yemenite, and wisdom is also Yemenite i.e. the Yemenites are wellknown for their true belief and wisdom)." Abu 'Abdullah (Al-Bukhari) said,
"Yemen was called so because it is situated to the right of the Ka'ba, and
Sham was called so because it is situated to the left of the Ka'ba."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 704:
Narrated Muhammad bin Jubair bin Mut'im:
That while he was with a delegation from Quraish to Muawiya, the latter
heard the news that 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As said that there would be a
king from the tribe of Qahtan. On that Muawiya became angry, got up and
then praised Allah as He deserved, and said, "Now then, I have heard that
some men amongst you narrate things which are neither in the Holy Book,
nor have been told by Allah's Apostle. Those men are the ignorant amongst
you. Beware of such hopes as make the people go astray, for I heard Allah's
Apostle saying, 'Authority of ruling will remain with Quraish, and whoever
bears hostility to them, Allah will destroy him as long as they abide by the
laws of the religion.' "
Volume 4, Book 56, Number 705:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
The Prophet said, "Authority of ruling will remain with Quraish, even if only
two of them remained."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 706:
Narrated Jubair bin Mut'im:
'Uthman bin Affan went (to the Prophet) and said, "O Allah's Apostle! You
gave property to Bani Al-Muttalib and did not give us, although we and they
are of the same degree of relationship to you." The Prophet said, "Only Bani
Hashim and Bani Al Muttalib are one thing (as regards family status)."
Narrated Urwa bin Az-Zubair: 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair went with some
women of the tribe of Bani Zuhra to 'Aisha who used to treat them nicely
because of their relation to Allah's Apostle.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 707:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The tribe of Quraish, the Ansar, the (people of the
tribe of) Julhaina, Muzaina, Aslam, Ashja', and Ghifar are my disciples and
have no protectors except Allah and His Apostle."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 708:
Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair:
'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair was the most beloved person to 'Aisha excluding
the Prophet and Abu Bakr, and he in his turn, was the most devoted to her,
'Aisha used not to withhold the money given to her by Allah, but she used to
spend it in charity. ('Abdullah) bin AzZubair said, " 'Aisha should be stopped
from doing so." (When 'Aisha heard this), she said protestingly, "Shall I b
stopped from doing so? I vow that I will never talk to 'Abdullah bin AzZubair." On that, Ibn Az-Zubair asked some people from Quraish and
particularly the two uncles of Allah's Apostle to intercede with her, but she
refused (to talk to him). Az-Zuhriyun, the uncles of the Prophet, including
'Abdur-Rahman bin Al-Aswad bin 'Abd Yaghuth and Al-Miswar bin
Makhrama said to him, "When we ask for the permission to visit her, enter
her house along with us (without taking her leave)." He did accordingly (and
she accepted their intercession). He sent her ten slaves whom she
manumitted as an expiation for (not keeping) her vow. 'Aisha manumitted
more slaves for the same purpose till she manumitted forty slaves. She said,
"I wish I had specified what I would have done in case of not fulfilling my
vow when I made the vow, so that I might have done it easily."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 709:
Narrated Anas:
Uthman called Zaid bin Thabit, Abdullah bin Az-Zubair, Said bin Al-'As and
'AbdurRahman bin Al-Harith bin Hisham, and then they wrote the
manuscripts of the Holy Qur'an in the form of book in several copies.
'Uthman said to the three Quraishi persons. " If you differ with Zaid bin
Thabit on any point of the Quran, then write it in the language of Quraish, as
the Quran was revealed in their language." So they acted accordingly. (Said
bin Thabit was an Ansari and not from Quraish ).

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 710:
Narrated Salama:
Allah's Apostle passed by some people from the tribe of Aslam practicing
archery. He said, "O children of Ishmael! Throw (arrows), for your father was
an archer. I am on the side of Bani so-and-so," meaning one of the two
teams. The other team stopped throwing, whereupon the Prophet said,
"What has happened to them?" They replied, "How shall we throw while
you are with Bani so-and-so?" He said, "Throw for I am with all of you."
Volume 4, Book 56, Number 711:
Narrated Abu Dhar:
The Prophet said, "If somebody claims to be the son of any other than his
real father knowingly, he but disbelieves in Allah, and if somebody claims to
belong to some folk to whom he does not belong, let such a person take his
place in the (Hell) Fire."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 712:
Narrated Wathila bin Al-Asqa:
Allah's Apostle said, "Verily, one of the worst lies is to claim falsely to be the
son of someone other than one's real father, or to claim to have had a
dream one has not had, or to attribute to me what I have not said."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 713:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The delegates of 'Abd-ul-Qais came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's
Apostle! We are from the tribe of Rabi'a and the infidels of Mudar tribe
stand between us and you, so that we cannot come to you except in the
Sacred Months. Therefore we would like you to give us some instructions
which we may follow and convey to our people staying behind us." The
Prophet said, "I order you to observe four things and forbid you (to do) four
things: (I order you) to believe in Allah testifying that None has the right to
be worshipped except Allah; to offer the prayer perfectly; to pay the Zakat;
and to give one-fifth of the war booty to Allah. And I forbid you to use AdDubba, Al-Hantam, An-Naqir and Al-Muzaffat." (These are names of utensils
in which alcoholic drinks were served.)

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 714:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
I heard Allah's Apostle on the pulpit saying, "Verily, afflictions (will start)
from here," pointing towards the east, "whence the side of the head of
Satan comes out."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 715:
Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet said, "The tribes of Quraish, Al-Ansar,
Juhaina, Muzaina, Aslam, Ghifar and Ashja' are my helpers, and they have no
protector (i.e. Master) except Allah and His Apostle."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 716:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
While Allah's Apostle was on the pulpit, he said, "May Allah give the tribe of
Ghifar! And may Allah save the tribe of Aslam! The tribe of 'Usaiya have
disobeyed Allah and His Apostle."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 717:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "May Allah save the tribe of Aslam, and may Allah forgive
the tribe of Ghifar!"

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 718:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
The Prophet said, "Do you think that the tribes of Juhaina, Muzaina, Aslam
and Ghifar are better than the tribes of Bani Tamim, Bani Asad, Bam
'Abdullah bin Ghatafan and Bani Amir bin Sasaa?" A man said, "They were
unsuccessful and losers." The Prophet added," (Yes), they are better than
the tribes of Bani Tamim, Bani Asad, Bani Abdullah bin Ghatafan and Bani
Amir bin Sasaa."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 719:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
Al-Aqra' bin Habis said to the Prophet "Nobody gave you the pledge of
allegiance but the robbers of the pilgrims (i.e. those who used to rob the
pilgrims) from the tribes of Aslam, Ghifar, Muzaina." (Ibn Abi Ya'qub is in
doubt whether Al-Aqra' added. 'And Juhaina.') The Prophet said, "Don't you
think that the tribes of Aslam, Ghifar, Muzaina (and also perhaps) Juhaina
are better than the tribes of Bani Tamim, Bani Amir, Asad, and Ghatafan?"
Somebody said, "They were unsuccessful and losers!" The Prophet said,
"Yes, by Him in Whose Hands my life is, they (i.e. the former) are better than
they (i.e. the latter)."
Abu Huraira said, "(The Prophet said), '(The people of) Bani Aslam, Ghifar
and some people of Muzaina (or some people of Juhaina or Muzaina) are
better in Allah's Sight (or on the Day of Resurrection) than the tribes of
Asad, Tamim, Hawazin and Ghatafan.' "

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 720:
Narrated Jabir:
We were in the company of the Prophet in a Ghazwa. A large number of
emigrants joined him and among the emigrants there was a person who
used to play jokes (or play with spears); so he (jokingly) stroked an Ansari
man on the hip. The Ans-ari got so angry that both of them called their
people. The Ansari said, "Help, O Ansar!" And the emigrant said "Help, O
emigrants!" The Prophet came out and said, "What is wrong with the people
(as they are calling) this call of the period of Ignorance? "Then he said,
"What is the matter with them?" So he was told about the stroke of the
emigrant to the Ansari. The Prophet said, "Stop this (i.e. appeal for help) for
it is an evil call. "Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul (a hypocrite) said, "The
emigrants have called and (gathered against us); so when we return to
Medina, surely, the more honorable people will expel therefrom the
meaner," Upon that 'Umar said, "O Allah's Prophet! Shall we not kill this evil
person (i.e. Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul) ?" The Prophet) said, "(No), lest the
people should say that Muhammad used to kill his companions."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 721:
Narrated 'Abdullah (bin Mas'ud):
The Prophet said, "Who-ever slaps his face or tears the bosom of his dress,
or calls the calls of the Period of Ignorance, is not from us."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 722:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "'Amr bin Luhai bin Qam'a bin Khindif was the father of
Khuza'a.'

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 723:
Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab:
Al-Bahira was an animal whose milk was spared for the idols and other
dieties, and so nobody was allowed to milk it. As-Saiba was an animal which
they (i.e infidels) used to set free in the names of their gods so that it would
not be used for carrying anything. Abu Huraira said, "The Prophet said, 'I
saw Amr bin 'Amir bin Luhai Al-Khuzai dragging his intestines in the (Hell)
Fire, for he was the first man who started the custom of releasing animals
(for the sake of false gods).' "

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 724:
Narrated Ibn Abbas
When the news of the advent of the Prophet reached Abu Dhar, he said to
his brother, "Ride to this valley and bring me the news of this man (i.e. the
Prophet ) who claims to be a Prophet receiving information from the
Heaven. Listen to him and then come to me." His brother set out till he met
the Prophet and listened to his speech and returned to Abu Dhar and said to
him, "I have seen him exhorting people to virtues and his speech was not
like poetry." Abu Dhar said, "You have not satisfied me as to what I
wanted." So, he took his journey-food and a water-skin full of water and set
out till he reached Mecca, where he went to the Mosque looking for the
Prophet , whom he did not know, and he would not like to ask someone
about him. So, a portion of the night had passed when 'Ali saw him and
realized that he was a stranger. Abu Dhar followed him (to his house), but
neither of them asked the other about anything till it was morning, when he
carried his water-skin and food and went to the Mosque. He spent that day
without being observed by the Prophet till it was night, when he returned to
his sleeping place. 'Ali again passed by him and said, "Hasn't the man (i.e.
Abu Dhar) recognized his dwelling place yet?" So, 'Ali let him get up and
took him (to his house), but neither of them asked the other about
anything, till it was the third day when 'Ali had the same experience with
him and Abu Dhar again stayed with him. 'Ali then asked, "Won't you tell me
what has brought you here?" He replied, "If you give me a promise and a
convention that you will guide me, then I will tell you." When 'Ali did, Abu
Dhar informed him (of his purpose). 'Ali said, "It is the Truth, and he (i.e.
Muhammad) is the Apostle of Allah. So when the morning comes, follow
me, and if I should perceive any danger threatening you, I will give you a hint
by pretending to go to the watercloset. But if I carried on walking, follow
me till you enter the place that I will enter." Abu Dhur agreed and followed
'Ali till he entered the place of the Prophet and Abu Dhur entered with him.
He then listened to the speech of the Prophet and embraced Islam on that
very spot. The Prophet said to him, "Go back to your people and inform
them (of this religion) till you receive my (further) orders." Abu Dhur said,
"By Him in Whose Hands my life is! I will proclaim my conversion to Islam
publicly amongst them (i.e. infidels)." He went out till he reached the
Mosque and announced as loudly as possible, "I testify that None has the
right to be worshipped but Allah and that Muhammad is the Apostle of
Allah." The people then got up and beat him till they knocked him down. AlAbbas came and threw himself over him (to protect him) saying, Woe to
you! Don't you know that he is from Ghifar and there is the route (road) to
your merchants towards Sham (i.e. through the place where this tribe
dwells)?" Thus he saved him from them. Abu Dhar did the same on the next
day and the people beat him again and Al-'Abbas drew himself over him (to
save him as before).

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 725:
Narrated Abu Jamra:
Ibn 'Abbas said to us, "Shall I tell you the story of Abu Dhar's conversion to
Islam?" We said, "Yes." He said, "Abu Dhar said: I was a man from the tribe
of Ghifar. We heard that a man had appeared in Mecca, claiming to be a
Prophet. ! said to my brother, 'Go to that man and talk to him and bring me
his news.' He set out, met him and returned. I asked him, 'What is the news
with you?' He said, 'By Allah, I saw a man enjoining what is good and
forbidding what is evil.' I said to him, 'You have not satisfied me with this
little information.' So, I took a waterskin and a stick and proceeded towards
Mecca. Neither did I know him (i.e. the Prophet ), nor did I like to ask anyone
about him. I Kept on drinking Zam zam water and staying in the Mosque.
Then 'Ali passed by me and said, 'It seems you are a stranger?' I said, 'Yes.'
He proceeded to his house and I accompanied him. Neither did he ask me
anything, nor did I tell him anything. Next morning I went to the Mosque to
ask about the Prophet but no-one told me anything about him. Ali passed by
me again and asked, 'Hasn't the man recognized his dwelling place yet' I
said, 'No.' He said, 'Come along with me.' He asked me, 'What is your
business? What has brought you to this town?' I said to him, 'If you keep my
secret, I will tell you.' He said, 'I will do,' I said to him, 'We have heard that a
person has appeared here, claiming to be a Prophet. I sent my brother to
speak to him and when he returned, he did not bring a satisfactory report;
so I thought of meeting him personally.' 'Ali said (to Abu Dhar), 'You have
reached your goal; I am going to him just now, so follow me, and wherever I
enter, enter after me. If I should see someone who may cause you trouble, I
will stand near a wall pretending to mend my shoes (as a warning), and you
should go away then.' 'Ali proceeded and I accompanied him till he entered
a place, and I entered with him to the Prophet to whom I said, 'Present (the
principles of) Islam to me.' When he did, I embraced Islam 'immediately. He
said to me, 'O Abu Dhar! Keep your conversion as a secret and return to your
town; and when you hear of our victory, return to us. ' I said, 'By H him Who
has sent you with the Truth, I will announce my conversion to Islam publicly
amongst them (i.e. the infidels),' Abu Dhar went to the Mosque, where
some people from Quraish were present, and said, 'O folk of Quraish ! I
testify that None has the right to be worshipped except Allah, and I (also)
testify that Muhammad is Allah's Slave and His Apostle.' (Hearing that) the
Quraishi men said, 'Get at this Sabi (i.e. Muslim) !' They got up and beat me
nearly to death. Al 'Abbas saw me and threw himself over me to protect me.
He then faced them and said, 'Woe to you! You want to kill a man from the
tribe of Ghifar, although your trade and your communications are through
the territory of Ghifar?' They therefore left me. The next morning I returned
(to the Mosque) and said the same as I have said on the previous day. They
again said, 'Get at this Sabi!' I was treated in the same way as on the
previous day, and again Al-Abbas found me and threw himself over me to
protect me and told them the same as he had said the day before.' So, that
was the conversion of Abu Dhar (may Allah be Merciful to him) to Islam."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 726:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
If you wish to know about the ignorance of the Arabs, refer to Surat-alAnam after Verse No. 130:--Indeed lost are those who have killed their
children From folly without knowledge and have forbidden that which Allah
has provided for them, inventing a lie against Allah. They have indeed gone
astray and were not guided.' (6.14)

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 727:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
When the Verse:-- 'And warn your tribe of near kindred.' (26.214) was
revealed, the Prophet started calling (the 'Arab tribes), "O Bani Fihr, O Bani
'Adi" mentioning first the various branch tribes of Quraish.
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: When the Verse:-- 'And warn your tribe of near kindred'
(26.214). was revealed, the Prophet started calling every tribe by its name.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 728:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "O Bani 'Abd Munaf! Buy yourselves from Allah; O Bani
'Abdul-Muttalib! Buy yourselves from Allah; O mother of Az-Zubair bin AlAwwam, the aunt of Allah's Apostle, and O Fatima bint Muhammad! Buy
yourselves from Allah, for I cannot defend you before Allah. You (both) can
ask me from my property as much as you like. "

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 729:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet sent for the Ansar (and when they came), he asked, 'Is there
any stranger amongst you?" They said, "No except the son of our sister."
Allah's Apostle said, "The son of the sister of some people belongs to
them."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 730:
Narrated 'Aisha:
That during the Mina days, Abu Bakr came to her, while there where two
girls with her, beating drums, and the Prophet was (lying) covering himself
with his garment. Abu Bakr rebuked the two girls, but the Prophet
uncovered his face and said, "O Abu Bakr! Leave them, for these are the
days of Id (festival)." Those days were the days of Mina-. 'Aisha added, "I
was being screened by the Prophet while I was watching the Ethiopians
playing in the Mosque. 'Umar rebuked them, but the Prophet said, "Leave
them, O Bani Arfida! Play. (for) you are safe."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 731:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Once Hassan bin Thabit asked the permission of the Prophet to lampoon
(i.e. compose satirical poetry defaming) the infidels. The Prophet said,
"What about the fact that I have common descent with them?" Hassan
replied, "I shall take you out of them as a hair is taken out of dough."
Narrated 'Urwa: I started abusing Hassan in front of 'Aisha, whereupon she
said. "Don't abuse him, for he used to defend the Prophet (with his
poetry)."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 732:
Narrated Jubair bin Mutim:
Allah's Apostle said, "I have five names: I am Muhammad and Ahmad; I am
Al-Mahi through whom Allah will eliminate infidelity; I am Al-Hashir who will
be the first to be resurrected, the people being resurrected there after; and I
am also Al-'Aqib (i.e. There will be no prophet after me)."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 733:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Doesn't it astonish you how Allah protects me from
the Quraish's abusing and cursing? They abuse Mudhammam and curse
Mudhammam while I am Muhammad (and not Mudhammam)"

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 734:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "My similitude in comparison with the other prophets is
that of a man who has built a house completely and excellently except for a
place of one brick. When the people enter the house, they admire its beauty
and say: 'But for the place of this brick (how splendid the house will be)!"

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 735:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "My similitude in comparison with the other prophets
before me, is that of a man who has built a house nicely and beautifully,
except for a place of one brick in a corner. The people go about it and
wonder at its beauty, but say: 'Would that this brick be put in its place!' So I
am that brick, and I am the last of the Prophets."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 736:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet died when he was sixty three years old.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 737:
Narrated Anas:
While the Prophet was in the market, a man called (somebody), "O Abu-lQasim!' The Prophet turned to him and said "Name yourselves after me but
do not call yourselves by my Kuniya."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 738:
Narrated Jabir:
The Prophet said, "Name yourselves after me, but do not call yourselves by
my Kuniya."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 739:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Abu-l-Qasim said, "Name yourselves after me, but do not call yourselves by
my Kuniya."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 740:
Narrated Al-Ju'aid bin 'Abdur Rahman:
I saw As-Sa'ib bin Yazid when he was ninety-four years old, quite strong and
of straight figure. He said, "I know that I enjoyed my hearing and seeing
powers only because of the invocation of Allah's Apostle . My aunt took me
to him and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! My nephew is sick; will you invoke Allah
for him?' So he invoked (Allah) for me."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 741:
Narrated As- Scab bin Yazid:
My aunt took me to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! My nephew
is sick"' The Prophet passed his hands over my head and blessed me. Then
he performed ablution and I drank the remaining water, and standing
behind him. A saw the seal in between his shoulders."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 742:
Narrated 'Uqba bin Al-Harith:
(Once) Abu Bakr offered the 'Asr prayer and then went out walking and saw
Al-Hasan playing with the boys. He lifted him on to his shoulders and said, "
Let my parents be sacrificed for your sake! (You) resemble the Prophet and
not 'Ali," while 'Ali was smiling.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 743:
Narrated Abu Juhaifa:
I saw the Prophet, and Al-Hasan resembled him.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 744:
Narrated Isma'il bin Abi Khalid:
I heard Abii Juhaifa saying, "I saw the Prophet, and Al-Hasan bin 'Ali
resembled him." I said to Abu- Juhaifa, "Describe him for me." He said, "He
was white and his beard was black with some white hair. He promised to
give us 13 young she-camels, but he expired before we could get them."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 745:
Narrated Wahb Abu Juhaifa As-Sawwai:
I saw the Prophet and saw some white hair below his lower lip above the
chin.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 746:
Narrated Hariz bin 'Uthman:
That he asked 'Abdullah bin Busr (i.e. the companion of the Prophet), "Did
you see the Prophet when he was old?" He said, "He had a few white hairs
between the lower lip and the chin."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 747:
Narrated Rabia bin Abi Abdur-Rahman:
I heard Anas bin Malik describing the Prophet saying, "He was of medium
height amongst the people, neither tall nor short; he had a rosy color,
neither absolutely white nor deep brown; his hair was neither completely
curly nor quite lank. Divine Inspiration was revealed to him when he was
forty years old. He stayed ten years in Mecca receiving the Divine
Inspiration, and stayed in Medina for ten more years. When he expired, he
had scarcely twenty white hairs in his head and beard." Rabi'a said, "I saw
some of his hairs and it was red. When I asked about that, I was told that it
turned red because of scent. "

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 748:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle was neither very tall nor short, neither absolutely white nor
deep brown. His hair was neither curly nor lank. Allah sent him (as an
Apostle) when he was forty years old. Afterwards he resided in Mecca for
ten years and in Medina for ten more years. When Allah took him unto Him,
there was scarcely twenty white hairs in his head and beard.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 749:
Narrated Al-Bara:
Allah's Apostle was the handsomest of all the people, and had the best
appearance. He was neither very tall nor short.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 750:
Narrated Qatada:
I asked Anas, "Did the Prophet use to dye (his) hair?" He said, "No, for there
were only a few white hairs on his temples."
Volume 4, Book 56, Number 751:
Narrated Al-Bara:
The Prophet was of moderate height having broad shoulders (long) hair
reaching his ear-lobes. Once I saw him in a red cloak and I had never seen a
more handsome than him."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 752:
Narrated Abu Ishaq:
Al-Bara' was asked, "Was the face of the Prophet (as bright) as a sword?" He
said, "No, but (as bright) as a moon."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 753:
Narrated Abu Juhaifa:
Once Allah's Apostle went to Al-Batha' at noon, performed the ablution and
offered' a two Rakat Zuhr prayer and a two-Rak'at 'Asr prayer while a
spearheaded stick was planted before him and the passersby were passing
in front of it. (After the prayer), the people got up and held the hands of the
Prophet and passed them on their faces. I also took his hand and kept it on
my face and noticed that it was colder than ice, and its smell was nicer than
musk.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 754:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet was the most generous of all the people, and he used to
become more generous in Ramadan when Gabriel met him. Gabriel used to
meet him every night during Ramadan to revise the Qur'an with him. Allah's
Apostle then used to be more generous than the fast wind
Volume 4, Book 56, Number 755:
Narrated 'Aisha:
That Allah's Apostle came to her in a happy mood with his features glittering
with joy, and said, "Have you not heard what the Qaif has said about Zaid
and Us-ama? He saw their feet and remarked. These belong to each other."
(i.e. They are father and son.)

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 756:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Ka'b:
I heard Ka'b bin Malik talking after his failure to join (the Ghazwa of) Tabuk.
He said, "When I greeted Allah's Apostle whose face was glittering with
happiness, for whenever Allah's Apostle was happy, his face used to glitter,
as if it was a piece of the moon, and we used to recognize it (i.e. his
happiness) from his face."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 757:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "I have been sent (as an Apostle) in the best of all the
generations of Adam's offspring since their Creation."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 758:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle used to let his hair hang down while the infidels used to part
their hair. The people of the Scriptures were used to letting their hair hang
down and Allah's Apostle liked to follow the people of the Scriptures in the
matters about which he was not instructed otherwise. Then Allah's Apostle
parted his hair
Volume 4, Book 56, Number 759:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
The Prophet never used bad language neither a "Fahish nor a Mutafahish.
He used to say "The best amongst you are those who have the best
manners and character." (See Hadith No. 56 (B) Vol. 8)

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 760:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Whenever Allah's Apostle was given the choice of one of two matters, he
would choose the easier of the two, as long as it was not sinful to do so, but
if it was sinful to do so, he would not approach it. Allah's Apostle never took
revenge (over anybody) for his own sake but (he did) only when Allah's
Legal Bindings were outraged in which case he would take revenge for
Allah's Sake.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 761:
Narrated Anas:
I have never touched silk or Dibaj (i.e. thick silk) softer than the palm of the
Prophet nor have I smelt a perfume nicer than the sweat of the Prophet

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 762:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The Prophet was shier than a veined virgin girl.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 763:
Narrated Shuba:
A similar Hadith (i e. No. 762) with this addition: And if he (i.e. the Prophet)
disliked something, the sign of aversion would appear on his face.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 764:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet never criticized any food (presented him), but he would eat it if
he liked it; otherwise, he would leave it (without expressing his dislike).

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 765:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Malik bin Buhaina Al-Asdi:
When the Prophet prostrated, he used to keep his arms so widely apart that
we used to see his armpits. (The sub-narrator, Ibn Bukair said, "The
whiteness of his armpits.")

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 766:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle did not use to raise his hands in his invocations except in the
Istisqa (i.e. invoking Allah for the rain) in which he used to raise his hands so
high that one could see the whiteness of his armpits. (Note: It may be that
Anas did not see the prophet (as) raising his hands but it has been narrated
that the Prophet (as) used to raise his hands for invocations other than
Istisqa. See Hadith No. 612 Vol. 5. and Hadith No. 807 & 808 Vol 2.)

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 767:
Narrated Abu Juhaifa:
By chance I went to the Prophet at noon while he was at Al-Abtah (resting)
in a tent. Bilal came out (of the tent) and pronounced the Adhan for the
prayer, and entering again, he brought out the water which was left after
Allah's Apostle had performed the ablution. The people rushed to take some
of the water. Bilal again went in and brought out a spear-headed stick, and
then Allah's Apostle came out. As if I were now looking at the whiteness of
his leg. Bilal fixed the stick and the Prophet offered a two-Rakat Zuhr prayer
and a two-Rak'at 'Asr prayer, while women and donkeys were passing in
front of the Prophet (beyond the stick) .

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 768:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to talk so clearly that if somebody wanted to count the
number of his words, he could do so. Narrated Urwa bin Az-Zubair: 'Aisha
said (to me), "Don't you wonder at Abu so-and-so who came and sat by my
dwelling and started relating the traditions of Allah's Apostle intending to
let me hear that, while I was performing an optional prayer. He left before I
finished my optional prayer. Had I found him still there. I would have said to
him, 'Allah's Apostle never talked so quickly and vaguely as you do.' "

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 769:
Narrated Abu Salama bin 'Abdur-Rahman:
That he asked 'Aisha "How was the prayer of Allah's Apostle in the month of
Ramadan?" She replied, "He used not to pray more than eleven Rakat
whether in Ramadan or in any other month. He used to offer four Rakat, let
alone their beauty and length, and then four Rakat, let alone their beauty
and length. Afterwards he would offer three Rakat. I said, 'O Allah's Apostle!
Do you go to bed before offering the Witr prayer?' He said, 'My eyes sleep,
but my heart does not sleep."'
Volume 4, Book 56, Number 770:
Narrated Sharik bin 'Abdullah bin Abi Namr:
I heard Anas bin Malik telling us about the night when the Prophet was
made to travel from the Ka'ba Mosque. Three persons (i.e. angels) came to
the Prophet before he was divinely inspired was an Aspostle), while he was
sleeping in Al Masjid-ul-Haram. The first (of the three angels) said, "Which of
them is he?" The second said, "He is the best of them." That was all that
happened then, and he did not see them till they came at another night and
he perceived their presence with his heart, for the eyes of the Prophet were
closed when he was asleep, but his heart was not asleep (not unconscious).
This is characteristic of all the prophets: Their eyes sleep but their hearts do
not sleep. Then Gabriel took charge of the Prophet and ascended along with
him to the Heaven.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 771:
Narrated Imran bin Husain:
That they were with the Prophet on a journey. They travelled the whole
night, and when dawn approached, they took a rest and sleep overwhelmed
them till the sun rose high in the sky. The first to get up was Abu Bakr.
Allah's Apostles used not to be awakened from his sleep, but he would wake
up by himself. 'Umar woke up and then Abu Bakr sat by the side of the
Prophet's head and started saying: Allahu-Akbar raising his voice till the
Prophet woke up, (and after traveling for a while) he dismounted and led us
in the morning prayer. A man amongst the people failed to join us in the
prayer. When the Prophet had finished the prayer, he asked (the man), "O
so-and-so! What prevented you from offering the prayer with us?" He
replied, "I am Junub," Alllah's Apostle ordered him to perform Tayammam
with clean earth. The man then offered the prayer. Allah's Apostle ordered
me and a few others to go ahead of him. We had become very thirsty. While
we were on our way (looking for water), we came across a lady (riding an
animal), hanging her legs between two water-skins. We asked her, "Where
can we get water?" She replied, "Oh ! There is no water." We asked, "how
far is your house from the water?" She replied, "A distance of a day and a
night travel." We said, "Come on to Allah's Apostle, "She asked, "What is
Allah's Apostle ?" So we brought her to Allah's Apostle against her will, and
she told him what she had told us before and added that she was the
mother of orphans. So the Prophet ordered that her two water-skins be
brought and he rubbed the mouths of the water-skins. As we were thirsty,
we drank till we quenched our thirst and we were forty men. We also filled
all our waterskins and other utensils with water, but we did not water the
camels. The waterskin was so full that it was almost about to burst. The
Prophet then said, "Bring what (foodstuff) you have." So some dates and
pieces of bread were collected for the lady, and when she went to her
people, she said, "I have met either the greatest magician or a prophet as
the people claim." So Allah guided the people of that village through that
lady. She embraced Islam and they all embraced Islam.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 772:
Narrated Anas:
A bowl of water was brought to the Prophet while he was at Az-Zawra. He
placed his hand in it and the water started flowing among his fingers. All the
people performed ablution (with that water). Qatada asked Anas, "How
many people were you?" Anas replied, "Three hundred or nearly threehundred."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 773:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
I saw Allah's Apostle at the 'time when the Asr prayer was due. Then the
people were searching for water for ablution but they could not find any.
Then some water was brought to Allah's Apostle and he placed his hand in
the pot and ordered the people to perform the ablution with the water. I
saw water flowing from underneath his fingers and the people started
performing the ablution till all of them did it.
Volume 4, Book 56, Number 774:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet went out on one of his journeys with some of his companions.
They went on walking till the time of the prayer became due. They could not
find water to perform the ablution. One of them went away and brought a
little amount of water in a pot. The Prophet took it and performed the
ablution, and then stretched his four fingers on to the pot and said (to the
people), "Get up to perform the ablution." They started performing the
ablution till all of them did it, and they were seventy or so persons.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 775:
Narrated Humaid:
Anas bin Malik said, "Once the time of the prayer became due and the
people whose houses were close to the Mosque went to their houses to
perform ablution, while the others remained (sitting there). A stone pot
containing water was brought to the Prophet, who wanted to put his hand
in it, but It was too small for him to spread his hand in it, and so he had to
bring his fingers together before putting his hand in the pot. Then all the
people performed the ablution (with that water)." I asked Anas, "How many
persons were they." He replied, "There were eighty men."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 776:
Narrated Salim bin Abi Aj-Jad:
Jabir bin 'Abdullah said, "The people became very thirsty on the day of AlHudaibiya (Treaty). A small pot containing some water was in front of the
Prophet and when he had finished the ablution, the people rushed towards
him. He asked, 'What is wrong with you?' They replied, 'We have no water
either for performing ablution or for drinking except what is present in front
of you.' So he placed his hand in that pot and the water started flowing
among his fingers like springs. We all drank and performed ablution (from
it)." I asked Jabir, "How many were you?" he replied, "Even if we had been
one-hundred-thousand, it would have been sufficient for us, but we were
fifteen-hundred."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 777:
Narrated Al-Bara:
We were one-thousand-and-four-hundred persons on the day of AlHudaibiya (Treaty), and (at) Al-Hudaibiya (there) was a well. We drew out its
water not leaving even a single drop. The Prophet sat at the edge of the well
and asked for some water with which he rinsed his mouth and then he
threw it out into the well. We stayed for a short while and then drew water
from the well and quenched our thirst, and even our riding animals drank
water to their satisfaction.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 778:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Abu Talha said to Um Sulaim, "I have noticed feebleness in the voice of
Allah's Apostle which I think, is caused by hunger. Have you got any food?"
She said, "Yes." She brought out some loaves of barley and took out a veil
belonging to her, and wrapped the bread in part of it and put it under my
arm and wrapped part of the veil round me and sent me to Allah's Apostle. I
went carrying it and found Allah's Apostle in the Mosque sitting with some
people. When I stood there, Allah's Apostle asked, "Has Abu Talha sent
you?" I said, "Yes". He asked, "With some food? I said, "Yes" Allah's Apostle
then said to the men around him, "Get up!" He set out (accompanied by
them) and I went ahead of them till I reached Abu Talha and told him (of the
Prophet's visit). Abu Talha said, "O Um Sulaim! Allah's Apostle is coming
with the people and we have no food to feed them." She said, "Allah and His
Apostle know better." So Abu Talha went out to receive Allah's Apostle.
Allah's Apostle came along with Abu Talha. Allah's Apostle said, "O Um
Sulaim! Bring whatever you have." She brought the bread which Allah's
Apostle ordered to be broken into pieces. Um Sulaim poured on them some
butter from an oilskin. Then Allah's Apostle recited what Allah wished him to
recite, and then said, "Let ten persons come (to share the meal)." Ten
persons were admitted, ate their fill and went out. Then he again said, "Let
another ten do the same." They were admitted, ate their fill and went out.
Then he again said, '"'Let another ten persons (do the same.)" They were
admitted, ate their fill and went out. Then he said, "Let another ten persons
come." In short, all of them ate their fill, and they were seventy or eighty
men.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 779:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
We used to consider miracles as Allah's Blessings, but you people consider
them to be a warning. Once we were with Allah's Apostle on a journey, and
we ran short of water. He said, "Bring the water remaining with you." The
people brought a utensil containing a little water. He placed his hand in it
and said, "Come to the blessed water, and the Blessing is from Allah." I saw
the water flowing from among the fingers of Allah's Apostle , and no doubt,
we heard the meal glorifying Allah, when it was being eaten (by him).

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 780:
Narrated Jabir:
My father had died in debt. So I came to the Prophet and said, "My father
(died) leaving unpaid debts, and I have nothing except the yield of his date
palms; and their yield for many years will not cover his debts. So please
come with me, so that the creditors may not misbehave with me." The
Prophet went round one of the heaps of dates and invoked (Allah), and then
did the same with another heap and sat on it and said, "Measure (for
them)." He paid them their rights and what remained was as much as had
been paid to them.
Volume 4, Book 56, Number 781:
Narrated Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Bakr:
The companions of Suffa were poor people. The Prophet once said,
"Whoever has food enough for two persons, should take a third one (from
among them), and whoever has food enough for four persons, should take a
fifth or a sixth (or said something similar)." Abu Bakr brought three persons
while the Prophet took ten. And Abu Bakr with his three family member
(who were I, my father and my mother) (the sub-narrator is in doubt
whether 'Abdur-Rahman said, "My wife and my servant who was common
for both my house and Abu Bakr's house.") Abu Bakr took his supper with
the Prophet and stayed there till he offered the 'Isha' prayers. He returned
and stayed till Allah's Apostle took his supper. After a part of the night had
passed, he returned to his house. His wife said to him, "What has detained
you from your guests?" He said, "Have you served supper to them?" She
said, "They refused to take supper) until you come. They (i.e. some
members of the household) presented the meal to them but they refused
(to eat)" I went to hide myself and he said, "O Ghunthar!" He invoked Allah
to cause my ears to be cut and he rebuked me. He then said (to them):
Please eat!" and added, I will never eat the meal." By Allah, whenever we
took a handful of the meal, the meal grew from underneath more than that
handful till everybody ate to his satisfaction; yet the remaining food was
more than the original meal. Abu Bakr saw that the food was as much or
more than the original amount. He called his wife, "O sister of Bani Firas!"
She said, "O pleasure of my eyes. The food has been tripled in quantity."
Abu Bakr then started eating thereof and said, "It (i.e. my oath not to eat)
was because of Sa all." He took a handful from it, and carried the rest to the
Prophet. SO that food was with the Prophet . There was a treaty between us
and some people, and when the period of that treaty had elapsed, he
divided US into twelve groups, each being headed by a man. Allah knows
how many men were under the command of each leader. Anyhow, the
Prophet surely sent a leader with each group. Then all of them ate of that
meal.
Volume 4, Book 56, Number 782:
Narrated Anas:
Once during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle, the people of Medina suffered
from drought. So while the Prophet was delivering a sermon on a Friday a
man got up saying, "O Allah's Apostle! The horses and sheep have perished.
Will you invoke Allah to bless us with rain?" The Prophet lifted both his
hands and invoked. The sky at that time was as clear as glass. Suddenly a
wind blew, raising clouds that gathered together, and it started raining
heavily. We came out (of the Mosque) wading through the flowing water till
we reached our homes. It went on raining till the next Friday, when the
same man or some other man stood up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! The
houses have collapsed; please invoke Allah to withhold the rain." On that
the Prophet smiled and said, "O Allah, (let it rain) around us and not on us." I
then looked at the clouds to see them separating forming a sort of a crown
round Medina.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 783:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
The Prophet used to deliver his sermons while standing beside a trunk of a
datepalm. When he had the pulpit made, he used it instead. The trunk
started crying and the Prophet went to it, rubbing his hand over it (to stop
its crying).

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 784:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet used to stand by a tree or a date-palm on Friday. Then an Ansari
woman or man said. "O Allah's Apostle! Shall we make a pulpit for you?" He
replied, "If you wish." So they made a pulpit for him and when it was Friday,
he proceeded towards the pulpit (for delivering the sermon). The date-palm
cried like a child! The Prophet descended (the pulpit) and embraced it while
it continued moaning like a child being quietened. The Prophet said, "It was
crying for (missing) what it used to hear of religious knowledge given near
to it."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 785:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
That he heard Jabir bin 'Abdullah saying, "The roof of the Mosque was built
over trunks of date-palms working as pillars. When the Prophet delivered a
sermon, he used to stand by one of those trunks till the pulpit was made for
him, and he used it instead. Then we heard the trunk sending a sound like of
a pregnant she-camel till the Prophet came to it, and put his hand over it,
then it became quiet."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 786:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
Once 'Umar bin Al-Khattab said, said, "Who amongst you remembers the
statement of Allah's Apostle regarding the afflictions?" Hudhaifa replied, "I
remember what he said exactly." 'Umar said. "Tell (us), you are really a
daring man!'' Hudhaifa said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'A man's afflictions (i.e.
wrong deeds) concerning his relation to his family, his property and his
neighbors are expiated by his prayers, giving in charity and enjoining what is
good and forbidding what is evil.' " 'Umar said, "I don't mean these
afflictions but the afflictions that will be heaving up and down like waves of
the sea." Hudhaifa replied, "O chief of the believers! You need not fear
those (afflictions) as there is a closed door between you and them." 'Umar
asked, "Will that door be opened or broken?" Hudhaifa replied, "No, it will
be broken." 'Umar said, "Then it is very likely that the door will not be closed
again." Later on the people asked Hudhaifa, "Did 'Umar know what that
door meant?" He said. "Yes, 'Umar knew it as everyone knows that there will
be night before the tomorrow morning. I narrated to 'Umar an authentic
narration, not lies." We dared not ask Hudhaifa; therefore we requested
Masruq who asked him, "What does the door stand for?" He said, "Umar."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 787:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The Hour will not be established till you fight a nation
wearing hairy shoes, and till you fight the Turks, who will have small eyes,
red faces and flat noses; and their faces will be like flat shields. And you will
find that the best people are those who hate responsibility of ruling most of
all till they are chosen to be the rulers. And the people are of different
natures: The best in the pre-lslamic period are the best in Islam. A time will
come when any of you will love to see me rather than to have his family and
property doubled."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 788:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The Hour will not be established till you fight with the
Khudh and the Kirman from among the non-Arabs. They will be of red faces,
flat noses and small eyes; their faces will look like flat shields, and their
shoes will be of hair."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 789:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I enjoyed the company of Allah's Apostle for three years, and during the
other years of my life, never was I so anxious to understand the (Prophet's)
traditions as I was during those three years. I heard him saying, beckoning
with his hand in this way, "Before the Hour you will fight with people who
will have hairy shoes and live in Al-Bariz." (Sufyan, the sub-narrator once
said, "And they are the people of Al-Bazir.")
Volume 4, Book 56, Number 790:
Narrated 'Umar bin Taghlib:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Near the Hour you will fight with people who
will wear hairy shoes; and you will also fight people with flat faces like
shields."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 791:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "The Jews will fight with you, and you will be
given victory over them so that a stone will say, 'O Muslim! There is a Jew
behind me; kill him!' "

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 792:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said, "A time will come when the people will wage holy war,
and it will be asked, 'Is there any amongst you who has enjoyed the
company of Allah's Apostle?' They will say: 'Yes.' And then victory will be
bestowed upon them. They will wage holy war again, and it will be asked: 'Is
there any among you who has enjoyed the company of the companions of
Allah's Apostle ?' They will say: 'Yes.' And then victory will be bestowed on
them."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 793:
Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim:
While I was in the city of the Prophet, a man came and complained to him
(the Prophet, ) of destitution and poverty. Then another man came and
complained of robbery (by highwaymen). The Prophet said, "Adi! Have yo
been to Al-Hira?" I said, "I haven't been to it, but I was informed about it."
He said, "If you should live for a long time, you will certainly see that a lady
in a Howdah traveling from Al-Hira will (safely reach Mecca and) perform the
Tawaf of the Ka'ba, fearing none but Allah." I said to myself, "What will
happen to the robbers of the tribe of Tai who have spread evil through out
the country?" The Prophet further said. "If you should live long, the
treasures of Khosrau will be opened (and taken as spoils)." I asked, "You
mean Khosrau, son of Hurmuz?" He said, "Khosrau, son of Hurmuz; and if
you should live long, you will see that one will carry a handful of gold or
silver and go out looking for a person to accept it from him, but will find
none to accept it from him. And any of you, when meeting Allah, will meet
Him without needing an interpreter between him and Allah to interpret for
him, and Allah will say to him: 'Didn't I send a messenger to teach you?' He
will say: 'Yes.' Allah will say: 'Didn't I give you wealth and do you favors?' He
will say: 'Yes.' Then he will look to his right and see nothing but Hell, and
look to his left and see nothing but Hell."
'Adi further said: I heard the Prophet saying, "Save yourself from the (Hell)
Fire even with half a date (to be given in charity) and if you do not find a half
date, then with a good pleasant word." 'Adi added: (later on) I saw a lady in
a Howdah traveling from Al-Hira till she performed the Tawaf of the Ka'ba,
fearing none but Allah. And I was one of those who opened (conquered) the
treasures of Khosrau, son of Hurmuz. If you should live long, you will see
what the Prophet Abu-l-Qasim had said: 'A person will come out with a
handful. of gold...etc.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 794:
Narrated 'Adi:
as above (i.e. Hadith No. 793).

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 795:
Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amr:
The Prophet once came out and offered the funeral prayer for the martyrs
of Uhud, and proceeded to the pulpit and said, "I shall be your predecessor
and a witness on you, and I am really looking at my sacred Fount now, and
no doubt, I have been given the keys of the treasures of the world. By Allah,
I am not afraid that you will worship others along with Allah, but I am afraid
that you will envy and fight one another for worldly fortunes."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 796:
Narrated Usama:
Once the Prophet stood on one of the high buildings (of Medina) and said,
"Do you see what I see? I see affliction pouring among your hours like
raindrops."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 797:
Narrated Zainab bint Jahsh:
That the Prophet came to her in a state of fear saying, "None has the right
to be worshiped but Allah! Woe to the Arabs because of evil that has come
near. Today a hole has been made in the wall of Gog and Magog as large as
this." pointing with two of his fingers making a circle. Zainab said, "I said, 'O
Allah's Apostle! Shall we be destroyed though amongst us there are pious
people? ' He said, 'Yes, if evil increases."
Narrated Um Salama: The Prophet woke up and said, "Glorified be Allah:
What great (how many) treasures have been sent down, and what great
(how many ) afflictions have been sent down!"

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 798:
Narrated Sasaa:
Abu Said Al-Khudr said to me, "I notice that you like sheep and you keep
them; so take care of them and their food, for I have heard Allah's Apostle
saying, 'A time will come upon the people when the best of a Muslim's
property will be sheep, which he will take to the tops of mountains and to
the places of rain-falls to run away with his religion in order to save it from
afflictions.' "

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 799:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "There will be afflictions (and at the time) the sitting
person will be better than the standing one, and the standing one will be
better than the walking, and the walking will be better than the running.
And whoever will look towards those afflictions, they will overtake him, and
whoever will find a refuge or a shelter, should take refuge in it." The same
narration is reported by Abu Bakr, with the addition, "(The Prophet said),
'Among the prayers there is a prayer the missing of which will be to one like
losing one's family and property."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 800:
Narrated Ibn Mas'ud:
The Prophet said, "Soon others will be preferred to you, and there will be
things which you will not like." The companions of the Prophet asked, "O
Allah's Apostle! What do you order us to do (in this case)? " He said, "(I order
you) to give the rights that are on you and to ask your rights from Allah."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 801:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "This branch from Quraish will ruin the people." The
companions of the Prophet asked, "What do you order us to do (then)?" He
said, "I would suggest that the people keep away from them.''
Volume 4, Book 56, Number 802:
Narrated Said Al-Umawi:
I was with Marwan and Abu Huraira and heard Abu Huraira saying, "I heard
the trustworthy, truly inspired one (i.e. the Prophet ) saying, 'The
destruction of my followers will be brought about by the hands of some
youngsters from Quraish." Marwan asked, "Youngsters?" Abu Huraira said,
"If you wish, I would name them: They are the children of so-and-so and the
children of so-and-so."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 803:
Narrated Hudhaifa bin Al-Yaman:
The people used to ask Allah's Apostle about good, but I used to ask him
about evil for fear that it might overtake me. Once I said, "O Allah's Apostle!
We were in ignorance and in evil and Allah has bestowed upon us the
present good; will there by any evil after this good?" He said, "Yes." I asked,
"Will there be good after that evil?" He said, "Yes, but it would be tained
with Dakhan (i.e. Little evil)." I asked, "What will its Dakhan be?" He said,
"There will be some people who will lead (people) according to principles
other than my tradition. You will see their actions and disapprove of them." I
said, "Will there by any evil after that good?" He said, "Yes, there will be
some people who will invite others to the doors of Hell, and whoever
accepts their invitation to it will be thrown in it (by them)." I said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Describe those people to us." He said, "They will belong to us and
speak our language" I asked, "What do you order me to do if such a thing
should take place in my life?" He said, "Adhere to the group of Muslims and
their Chief." I asked, "If there is neither a group (of Muslims) nor a chief
(what shall I do)?" He said, "Keep away from all those different sects, even if
you had to bite (i.e. eat) the root of a tree, till you meet Allah while you are
still in that state."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 804:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
My companions learned (something about) good (through asking the
Prophet while I learned (something about) evil.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 805:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The Day of (Judgment) will not be established till there
is a war between two groups whose claims (or religion) will be the same."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 806:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The Hour will not be established till there is a war
between two groups among whom there will be a great number of
casualties, though the claims (or religion) of both of them will be one and
the same. And the Hour will not be established till there appear about thirty
liars, all of whom will be claiming to be the messengers of Allah. "

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 807:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
While we were with Allah's Apostle who was distributing (i.e. some
property), there came Dhu-l-Khuwaisira, a man from the tribe of Bani Tamim
and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Do Justice." The Prophet said, "Woe to you!
Who could do justice if I did not? I would be a desperate loser if I did not do
justice." 'Umar said, "O Allah's Apostle! Allow me to chop his head off." The
Prophet said, "Leave him, for he has companions who pray and fast in such a
way that you will consider your fasting negligible in comparison to theirs.
They recite Qur'an but it does not go beyond their throats (i.e. they do not
act on it) and they will desert Islam as an arrow goes through a victim's
body, so that the hunter, on looking at the arrow's blade, would see nothing
on it; he would look at its Risaf and see nothing: he would look at its Na,di
and see nothing, and he would look at its Qudhadh ( 1 ) and see nothing
(neither meat nor blood), for the arrow has been too fast even for the blood
and excretions to smear. The sign by which they will be recognized is that
among them there will be a black man, one of whose arms will resemble a
woman's breast or a lump of meat moving loosely. Those people will appear
when there will be differences amongst the people." I testify that I heard
this narration from Allah's Apostle and I testify that 'Ali bin Abi Talib fought
with such people, and I was in his company. He ordered that the man
(described by the Prophet ) should be looked for. The man was brought and
I looked at him and noticed that he looked exactly as the Prophet had
described him.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 808:
Narrated 'Ali:
I relate the traditions of Allah's Apostle to you for I would rather fall from
the sky than attribute something to him falsely. But when I tell you a thing
which is between you and me, then no doubt, war is guile. I heard Allah's
Apostle saying, "In the last days of this world there will appear some young
foolish people who will use (in their claim) the best speech of all people (i.e.
the Qur'an) and they will abandon Islam as an arrow going through the
game. Their belief will not go beyond their throats (i.e. they will have
practically no belief), so wherever you meet them, kill them, for he who kills
them shall get a reward on the Day of Resurrection."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 809:
Narrated Khabbab bin Al-Arat:
We complained to Allah's Apostle (of the persecution inflicted on us by the
infidels) while he was sitting in the shade of the Ka'ba, leaning over his Burd
(i.e. covering sheet). We said to him, "Would you seek help for us? Would
you pray to Allah for us?" He said, "Among the nations before you a
(believing) man would be put in a ditch that was dug for him, and a saw
would be put over his head and he would be cut into two pieces; yet that
(torture) would not make him give up his religion. His body would be
combed with iron combs that would remove his flesh from the bones and
nerves, yet that would not make him abandon his religion. By Allah, this
religion (i.e. Islam) will prevail till a traveler from Sana (in Yemen) to
Hadrarmaut will fear none but Allah, or a wolf as regards his sheep, but you
(people) are hasty.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 810:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet noticed the absence of Thabit bin Qais. A man said, "O Allah's
Apostle! I shall bring you his news." So he went to him and saw him sitting in
his house drooping his head (sadly). He asked Thabit, "What's the matter?"
Thabit replied, "An evil situation: A man used to raise his voice over the voice
of the Prophet and so all his good deeds have been annulled and he is from
the people of Hell." The man went back and told the Prophet that Thabit
had said so-and-so. (The sub-narrator, Musa bin Anas said, "The man went to
Thabit again with glad tidings)." The Prophet said to him, "Go and say to
Thabit: 'You are not from the people of Fire, but from the people of
Paradise."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 811:
Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib:
A man recited Surat-al-Kahf (in his prayer) and in the house there was a
(riding) animal which got frightened and started jumping. The man finished
his prayer with Taslim, but behold! A mist or a cloud hovered over him. He
informed the Prophet of that and the Prophet said, "O so-and-so! Recite, for
this (mist or cloud) was a sign of peace descending for the recitation of
Quran."
Volume 4, Book 56, Number 812:
Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib:
Abu Bakr came to my father who was at home and purchased a saddle from
him. He said to 'Azib. "Tell your son to carry it with me." So I carried it with
him and my father followed us so as to take the price (of the saddle). My
father said, "O Abu Bakr! Tell me what happened to you on your night
journey with Allah's Apostle (during Migration)." He said, "Yes, we travelled
the whole night and also the next day till midday. when nobody could be
seen on the way ( because of the severe heat) . Then there appeared a long
rock having shade beneath it, and the sunshine had not come to it yet. So
we dismounted there and I levelled a place and covered it with an animal
hide or dry grass for the Prophet to sleep on (for a while). I then said, 'Sleep,
O Allah's Apostle, and I will guard you.' So he slept and I went out to guard
him. Suddenly I saw a shepherd coming with his sheep to that rock with the
same intention we had when we came to it. I asked (him). 'To whom do you
belong, O boy?' He replied, 'I belong to a man from Medina or Mecca.' I said,
'Do your sheep have milk?' He said, 'Yes.' I said, 'Will you milk for us?' He
said, 'Yes.' He caught hold of a sheep and I asked him to clean its teat from
dust, hairs and dirt. (The sub-narrator said that he saw Al-Bara' striking one
of his hands with the other, demonstrating how the shepherd removed the
dust.) The shepherd milked a little milk in a wooden container and I had a
leather container which I carried for the Prophet to drink and perform the
ablution from. I went to the Prophet, hating to wake him up, but when I
reached there, the Prophet had already awakened; so I poured water over
the middle part of the milk container, till the milk was cold. Then I said,
'Drink, O Allah's Apostle!' He drank till I was pleased. Then he asked, 'Has the
time for our departure come?' I said, 'Yes.' So we departed after midday.
Suraqa bin Malik followed us and I said, 'We have been discovered, O Allah's
Apostle!' He said, Don't grieve for Allah is with us.' The Prophet invoked evil
on him (i.e. Suraqa) and so the legs of his horse sank into the earth up to its
belly. (The subnarrator, Zuhair is not sure whether Abu Bakr said, "(It sank)
into solid earth.") Suraqa said, 'I see that you have invoked evil on me.
Please invoke good on me, and by Allah, I will cause those who are seeking
after you to return.' The Prophet invoked good on him and he was saved.
Then, whenever he met somebody on the way, he would say, 'I have looked
for him here in vain.' So he caused whomever he met to return. Thus Suraqa
fulfilled his promise."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 813:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet paid a visit to a sick bedouin. The Prophet when visiting a
patient used to say, "No harm will befall you! May Allah cure you! May Allah
cure you!" So the Prophet said to the bedouin. "No harm will befall you. May
Allah cure you!" The bedouin said, "You say, may Allah cure me? No, for it is
a fever which boils in (the body of) an old man, and will lead him to the
grave." The Prophet said, "Yes, then may it be as you say."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 814:
Narrated Anas:
There was a Christian who embraced Islam and read Surat-al-Baqara and AlImran, and he used to write (the revelations) for the Prophet. Later on he
returned to Christianity again and he used to say: "Muhammad knows
nothing but what I have written for him." Then Allah caused him to die, and
the people buried him, but in the morning they saw that the earth had
thrown his body out. They said, "This is the act of Muhammad and his
companions. They dug the grave of our companion and took his body out of
it because he had run away from them." They again dug the grave deeply for
him, but in the morning they again saw that the earth had thrown his body
out. They said, "This is an act of Muhammad and his companions. They dug
the grave of our companion and threw his body outside it, for he had run
away from them." They dug the grave for him as deep as they could, but in
the morning they again saw that the earth had thrown his body out. So they
believed that what had befallen him was not done by human beings and had
to leave him thrown (on the ground).
Volume 4, Book 56, Number 815:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "When Khosrau perishes, there will be no (more)
Khosrau after him, and when Caesar perishes, there will be no more Caesar
after him. By Him in Whose Hands Muhammad's life is, you will spend the
treasures of both of them in Allah's Cause."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 816:
Narrated Jabir bin Samura:
The Prophet said, "When Khosrau perishes, there will be no more Khosrau a
after him, and when Caesar perishes, there will be no more Caesar after
him," The Prophet also said, "You will spend the treasures of both of them in
Allah's Cause."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 817:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Musailama-al-Kadhdhab (i.e. the liar) came in the life-time of Allah's Apostle
with many of his people (to Medina) and said, "If Muhammad makes me his
successor, I will follow him." Allah's Apostle went up to him with Thabit bin
Qais bin Shams; and Allah's Apostle was carrying a piece of a date-palm leaf
in his hand. He stood before Musailama (and his companions) and said, "If
you asked me even this piece (of a leaf), I would not give it to you. You
cannot avoid the fate you are destined to, by Allah. If you reject Islam, Allah
will destroy you. I think that you are most probably the same person whom I
have seen in the dream." Abu Huraira told me that Allah's Apostle; said,
"While I was sleeping, I saw (in a dream) two gold bracelets round my arm,
and that worried me too much. Then I was instructed divinely in my dream,
to blow them off and so I blew them off, and they flew away. I interpreted
the two bracelets as symbols of two liars who would appear after me. And
so one of them was Al-Ansi and the other was Musailama Al-Kadhdhab from
Al-Yamama."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 818:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "In a dream I saw myself migrating from Mecca to a place
having plenty of date trees. I thought that it was Al-Yamama or Hajar, but it
came to be Medina i.e. Yathrib. In the same dream I saw myself moving a
sword and its blade got broken. It came to symbolize the defeat which the
Muslims suffered from, on the Day of Uhud. I moved the sword again, and it
became normal as before, and that was the symbol of the victory Allah
bestowed upon Muslims and their gathering together. I saw cows in my
dream, and by Allah, that was a blessing, and they symbolized the believers
on the Day of Uhud. And the blessing was the good Allah bestowed upon us
and the reward of true belief which Allah gave us after the day of Badr.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 819:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Once Fatima came walking and her gait resembled the gait of the Prophet .
The Prophet said, "Welcome, O my daughter!" Then he made her sit on his
right or on his left side, and then he told her a secret and she started
weeping. I asked her, "Why are you weeping?" He again told her a secret
and she started laughing. I said, "I never saw happiness so near to sadness
as I saw today." I asked her what the Prophet had told her. She said, "I
would never disclose the secret of Allah's Apostle ." When the Prophet died,
I asked her about it. She replied. "The Prophet said.) 'Every year Gabriel used
to revise the Qur'an with me once only, but this year he has done so twice. I
think this portends my death, and you will be the first of my family to follow
me.' So I started weeping. Then he said. 'Don't you like to be the mistress of
all the ladies of Paradise or the mistress of all the lady believers? So I
laughed for that."
Volume 4, Book 56, Number 820:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet in his fatal illness, called his daughter Fatima and told her a
secret because of which she started weeping. Then he called her and told
her another secret, and she started laughing. When I asked her about that,
she replied, The Prophet told me that he would die in his fatal illness, and so
I wept, but then he secretly told me that from amongst his family, I would
be the first to join him, and so I laughed."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 821:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
About Ibn 'Abbas: 'Umar bin Al-Khattab used to treat Ibn 'Abbas very
favorably 'Abdur Rahman bin 'Auf said to him. "We also have sons that are
equal to him (but you are partial to him.)" Umar said, "It is because of his
knowledge." Then 'Umar asked Ibn 'Abbas about the interpretation of the
Verse:- 'When come the Help of Allah and the conquest (of Mecca) (110.1)
Ibn 'Abbas said. "It portended the death of Allah's Apostle, which Allah had
informed him of." 'Umar said, "I do not know from this Verse but what you
know."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 822:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle in his fatal illness came out, wrapped with a sheet, and his
head was wrapped with an oiled bandage. He sat on the pulpit, and praising
and glorifying Allah, he said, "Now then, people will increase but the Ansar
will decrease in number, so much so that they, compared with the people,
will be just like the salt in the! meals. So, if any of you should take over the
authority by which he can either benefit some people or harm some others,
he should accept the goodness of their good people (i.e. Ansar) and excuse
the faults of their wrong-doers." That was the last gathering which the
Prophet attended.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 823:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
Once the Prophet brought out Al-Hasan and took him up the pulpit along
with him and said, "This son of mine is a Saiyid (i.e. chief) and I hope that
Allah will help him bring about reconciliation between two Muslim groups."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 824:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet had informed us of the death of Ja'far and Zaid before the
news of their death reached us, and his eyes were shedding tears.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 825:
Narrated Jabir:
(Once) the Prophet said, "Have you got carpets?" I replied, "Whence can we
get carpets?" He said, "But you shall soon have carpets." I used to say to my
wife, "Remove your carpets from my sight," but she would say, "Didn't the
Prophet tell you that you would soon have carpets?" So I would give up my
request.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 826:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud:
Sa'd bin Mu'adh came to Mecca with the intention of performing 'Umra, and
stayed at the house of Umaiya bin Khalaf Abi Safwan, for Umaiya himself
used to stay at Sa'd's house when he passed by Medina on his way to Sham.
Umaiya said to Sad, "Will you wait till midday when the people are (at their
homes), then you may go and perform the Tawaf round the Ka'ba?" So,
while Sad was going around the Ka'ba, Abu Jahl came and asked, "Who is
that who is performing Tawaf?" Sad replied, "I am Sad." Abu Jahl said, "Are
you circumambulating the Ka'ba safely although you have given refuge to
Muhammad and his companions?" Sad said, "Yes," and they started
quarreling. Umaiya said to Sad, "Don't shout at Abi-l-Hakam (i.e. Abu Jahl),
for he is chief of the valley (of Mecca)." Sad then said (to Abu Jahl). 'By
Allah, if you prevent me from performing the Tawaf of the Ka'ba, I will spoil
your trade with Sham." Umaiya kept on saying to Sad, "Don't raise your
voice." and kept on taking hold of him. Sad became furious and said, (to
Umaiya), "Be away from me, for I have heard Muhammad saying that he will
kill you." Umaiiya said, "Will he kill me?" Sad said, "Yes,." Umaiya said, "By
Allah! When Muhammad says a thing, he never tells a lie." Umaiya went to
his wife and said to her, "Do you know what my brother from Yathrib (i.e.
Medina) has said to me?" She said, "What has he said?" He said, "He claims
that he has heard Muhammad claiming that he will kill me."
She said, By Allah! Muhammad never tells a lie." So when the infidels started
to proceed for Badr (Battle) and declared war (against the Muslims), his
wife said to him, "Don't you remember what your brother from Yathrib told
you?" Umaiya decided not to go but Abu Jahl said to him, "You are from the
nobles of the valley of Mecca), so you should accompany us for a day or
two." He went with them and thus Allah got him killed.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 827:
Narrated Abu Uthman:
I got the news that Gabriel came to the Prophet while Um Salama was
present. Gabriel started talking (to the Prophet and then left. The Prophet
said to Um Salama, "(Do you know) who it was?" (or a similar question). She
said, "It was Dihya (a handsome person amongst the companions of the
Prophet )." Later on Um Salama said, "By Allah! I thought he was none but
Dihya, till I heard the Prophet talking about Gabriel in his sermon." (The Sub-
narrator asked Abu 'Uthman, "From where have you heard this narration?"
He replied, "From Usama bin Zaid.")

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 828:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "I saw (in a dream) the people assembled in a
gathering, and then Abu Bakr got up and drew one or two buckets of water
(from a well) but there was weakness in his drawing. May Allah forgive him.
Then 'Umar took the bucket and in his hands it turned into a very large
bucket. I had never seen anyone amongst: the people who could draw the
water as strongly as 'Umar till all the people drank their fill and watered
their camels that knelt down there.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 829:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
The Jews came to Allah's Apostle and told him that a man and a woman
from amongst them had committed illegal sexual intercourse. Allah's
Apostle said to them, "What do you find in the Torah (old Testament) about
the legal punishment of Ar-Rajm (stoning)?" They replied, (But) we
announce their crime and lash them." Abdullah bin Salam said, "You are
telling a lie; Torah contains the order of Rajm." They brought and opened
the Torah and one of them solaced his hand on the Verse of Rajm and read
the verses preceding and following it. Abdullah bin Salam said to him, "Lift
your hand." When he lifted his hand, the Verse of Rajm was written there.
They said, "Muhammad has told the truth; the Torah has the Verse of Rajm.
The Prophet then gave the order that both of them should be stoned to
death. ('Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "I saw the man leaning over the woman to
shelter her from the stones."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 830:
Narrated Abdullah bin Masud:
During the lifetime of the Prophet the moon was split into two parts and on
that the Prophet said, "Bear witness (to thus)."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 831:
Narrated Anas:
That the Meccan people requested Allah's Apostle to show them a miracle,
and so he showed them the splitting of the moon.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 832:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The moon was split into two parts during the lifetime of the Prophet.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 833:
Narrated Anas:
Once two men from the companions of Allah's Apostle went out of the
house of the Prophet on a very dark night. They were accompanied by two
things that resembled two lamps lighting the way in front of them, and
when they parted, each of them was accompanied by one of those two
things (lamps) till they reached their homes.

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 834:
Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba:
The Prophet said, "Some of my followers will remain victorious (and on the
right path) till the Last Day comes, and they will still be victorious."
Volume 4, Book 56, Number 835:
Narrated Muawiya:
I heard the Prophet saying, "A group of people amongst my followers will
remain obedient to Allah's orders and they will not be harmed by anyone
who will not help them or who will oppose them, till Allah's Order (the Last
Day) comes upon them while they are still on the right path."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 836:
Narrated 'Urwa:
That the Prophet gave him one Dinar so as to buy a sheep for him. 'Urwa
bought two sheep for him with the money. Then he sold one of the sheep
for one Dinar, and brought one Dinar and a sheep to the Prophet. On that,
the Prophet invoked Allah to bless him in his deals. So 'Urwa used to gain
(from any deal) even if he bought dust. (In another narration) 'Urwa said, "I
heard Allah's Apostle saying, "There is always goodness in horses till the Day
of Resurrection." (The subnarrator added, "I saw 70 horses in 'Urwa's
house.') (Sufyan said, "The Prophet asked 'Urwa to buy a sheep for him as a
sacrifice.")

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 837:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "There is always goodness in horses till the Day of
Resurrection. "

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 838:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "There is always goodness in horses.
Volume 4, Book 56, Number 839:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "A horse may be kept for one of three purposes: for a man
it may be a source of reward; for another it may be a means of living; and for
a third it may be a burden (a source of committing sins). As for the one for
whom it is a source of reward, he is the one who keeps his horse for the
sake of Jihad in Allah's Cause; he ties it with a long rope on a pasture or in a
garden. So whatever its rope allows it to eat, will be regarded as good
rewardable deeds (for its owner). And if it breaks off its rope and jumps
over one or two hillocks, even its dung will be considered amongst his good
deeds. And if it passes by a river and drinks water from it, that will be
considered as good deeds for his benefit) even if he has had no intention of
watering it. A horse is a shelter for the one who keeps it so that he may earn
his living honestly and takes it as a refuge to keep him from following illegal
ways (of gaining money), and does not forget the rights of Allah (i.e. paying
the Zakat and allowing others to use it for Allah's Sake). But a horse is a
burden (and a source of committing sins for him who keeps it out of pride
and pretense and with the intention of harming the Muslims."
The Prophet was asked about donkeys. He replied, "Nothing has been
revealed to be concerning them except this comprehensive Verse (which
covers everything) :--'Then whosoever has done good equal to the weight of
an atom (or a small ant), Shall see it (its reward) And whosoever has done
evil equal to the weight of an atom (or a small ) ant), Shall see it (Its
punishment)." (99.7-8)

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 840:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle reached Khaibar in the early morning and the people of
Khaibar came out with their spades, and when they saw the Prophet they
said, "Muhammad and his army!" and returned hurriedly to take refuge in
the fort. The Prophet raised his hands and said, "Allah is Greater! Khaibar is
ruined ! If we approach a nation, then miserable is the morning of those who
are warned."

Volume 4, Book 56, Number 841:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I hear many narrations from you but I forget
them." He said, "Spread your covering sheet." I spread my sheet and he
moved both his hands as if scooping something and emptied them in the
sheet and said, "Wrap it." I wrapped it round my body, and since then I have
never forgotten a single Hadith.
VOLUME 5
BOOK 57. COMPANIONS OF THE PROPHET (1-119)
Volume 5, Book 57, Number 1:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
"Allah's Apostle said, "A time will come upon the people, when a group of
people will wage a holy war and it will be said, 'Is there amongst you anyone
who has accompanied Allah's Apostle?' They will say, 'Yes.' And so victory
will be bestowed on them. Then a time will come upon the people when a
group of people will wage a holy war, and it will be said, "Is there amongst
you a none who has accompanied the companions of Allah's Apostle?' They
will say, 'Yes.' And so victory will be bestowed on them. Then a time will
come upon the people when a group of people will wage a holy war, and it
will be said, "Is there amongst you anyone who has been in the company of
the companions of the companions of Allah's Apostle ?' They will say, 'Yes.'
And victory will be bestowed on them."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 2:
Narrated Imran bin Husain:
"Allah's Apostle said, 'The best of my followers are those living in my
generation (i.e. my contemporaries). and then those who will follow the
latter" 'Imran added, "I do not remember whether he mentioned two or
three generations after his generation, then the Prophet added, 'There will
come after you, people who will bear witness without being asked to do so,
and will be treacherous and untrustworthy, and they will vow and never
fulfill their vows, and fatness will appear among them."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 3:
Narrated Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "The best people are those living in my generation, and
then those who will follow them, and then those who will follow the latter.
Then there will come some people who will bear witness before taking
oaths, and take oaths before bearing witness." (Ibrahim, a sub-narrator said,
"They used to beat us for witnesses and covenants when we were still
children.")

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 4:
Narrated Al-Bara:
Abu Bakr bought a (camel) saddle from 'Azib for thirteen Dirhams. Abu Bakr
said to 'Azib, "Tell Al-Bara' to carry the saddle for me." 'Azib said, "No,
unless you relate to me what happened to you and Allah 's Apostle when
you left Mecca while the pagans were in search of you." Abu Bakr said, "We
left Mecca and we travel led continuously for that night and the following
day till it was midday. I looked (around) searching for shade to take as
shelter, and suddenly I came across a rock, and found a little shade there. So
I cleaned the place and spread a bed for the Prophet in the shade and said to
him, 'Lie down, O Allah's Apostle.' So the Prophet lay down and I went out,
looking around to see if there was any person pursuing us. Suddenly I saw a
shepherd driving his sheep towards the rock, seeking what we had already
sought from it. I asked him, 'To whom do you belong, O boy?' He said, 'I
belong to a man from Quraish.' He named the man and I recognized him. I
asked him, 'Is there any milk with your sheep?' He said, 'Yes.' I said, 'Will you
then milk (some) for us?' He said, 'Yes.' Then I asked him to tie the legs of
one of the sheep and clean its udder, and then ordered him to clean his
hands from dust. Then the shepherd cleaned his hands by striking his hands
against one another. After doing so, he milked a small amount of milk. I used
to keep for Allah's Apostle a leather water-container, the mouth of which
was covered with a piece of cloth. I poured water on the milk container till
its lower part was cold. Then I took the milk to the Prophet whom I found
awake. I said to him, 'Drink, O Allah's Apostle.' So he drank till I became
pleased. Then I said, 'It is time for us to move, O Allahs Apostle!' He said,
'Yes.' So we set out while the people (i.e. Quraish pagans) were searching
for us, but none found us except Suraiqa bin Malik bin Jushum who was
riding his horse. I said, 'These are our pursuers who have found us. O Allah's
Apostle!' He said, 'Do not grieve, for Allah is with us."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 5:
Narrated Abu Bakr:
I said to the Prophet while I was in the Cave. "If any of them should look
under his feet, he would see us." He said, "O Abu Bakr! What do you think of
two (persons) the third of whom is Allah?"

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 6:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle addressed the people saying, "Allah has given option to a
slave to choose this world or what is with Him. The slave has chosen what is
with Allah." Abu Bakr wept, and we were astonished at his weeping caused
by what the Prophet mentioned as to a Slave ( of Allah) who had been
offered a choice, (we learned later on) that Allah's Apostle himself was the
person who was given the choice, and that Abu Bakr knew best of all of us.
Allah's Apostle added, "The person who has favored me most of all both
with his company and wealth, is Abu Bakr. If I were to take a Khalil other
than my Lord, I would have taken Abu Bakr as such, but (what relates us) is
the Islamic brotherhood and friendliness. All the gates of the Mosque should
be closed except the gate of Abu Bakr."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 7:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
We used to compare the people as to who was better during the lifetime of
Allah's Apostle . We used to regard Abu Bakr as the best, then 'Umar, and
then 'Uthman .
Volume 5, Book 57, Number 8:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "If I were to take a Khalil, I would have taken Abu Bakr,
but he is my brother and my companion (in Islam)."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 9:
Narrated Aiyub:
The Prophet said, "If I were to take a Khalil, I would have taken him (i.e. Abu
Bakr) as a Khalil, but the Islamic brotherhood is better."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 10:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Mulaika:
The people of Kufa sent a letter to Ibn Az-Zubair, asking about (the
inheritance of) (paternal) grandfather. He replied that the right of the
inheritance of (paternal) grandfather is the same as that of father if the
father is dead) and added, "Allah's Apostle said, ' If I were to take a Khalil
from this nation, I would have taken him (i.e. Abu Bakr)."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 11:
Narrated Jubair bin Mutim:
A woman came to the Prophet who ordered her to return to him again. She
said, "What if I came and did not find you?" as if she wanted to say, "If I
found you dead?" The Prophet said, "If you should not find me, go to Abu
Bakr."
Volume 5, Book 57, Number 12:
Narrated 'Ammar:
I saw Allah's Apostle and there was none with him but five slaves, two
women and Abu Bakr (i.e. those were the only converts to Islam then).

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 13:
Narrated Abu Ad-Darda:
While I was sitting with the Prophet, Abu Bakr came, lifting up one corner of
h is garment uncovering h is knee. The Prophet said, "Your companion has
had a quarrel." Abu Bakr greeted (the Prophet ) and said, "O Allah's Apostle!
There was something (i.e. quarrel) between me and the Son of Al-Khattab. I
talked to him harshly and then regretted that, and requested him to forgive
me, but he refused. This is why I have come to you." The Prophet said thrice,
"O Abu Bakr! May Allah forgive you." In the meanwhile, 'Umar regretted (his
refusal of Abu Bakr's excuse) and went to Abu Bakr's house and asked if
Abu Bakr was there. They replied in the negative. So he came to the Prophet
and greeted him, but signs of displeasure appeared on the face of the
Prophet till Abu Bakr pitied ('Umar), so he knelt and said twice, "O Allah's
Apostle! By Allah! I was more unjust to him (than he to me)." The Prophet
said, "Allah sent me (as a Prophet) to you (people) but you said (to me),
'You are telling a lie,' while Abu Bakr said, 'He has said the truth,' and
consoled me with himself and his money." He then said twice, "Won't you
then give up harming my companion?" After that nobody harmed Abu Bakr.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 14:
Narrated 'Amr bin Al-As:
The Prophet deputed me to read the Army of Dhat-as-Salasil. I came to him
and said, "Who is the most beloved person to you?" He said, " 'Aisha." I
asked, "Among the men?" He said, "Her father." I said, "Who then?" He said,
"Then 'Umar bin Al-Khattab." He then named other men.
Volume 5, Book 57, Number 15:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "While a shepherd was amongst his sheep, a
wolf attacked them and took away one sheep. When the shepherd chased
the wolf, the wolf turned towards him and said, 'Who will be its guard on
the day of wild animals when nobody except I will be its shepherd. And
while a man was driving a cow with a load on it, it turned towards him and
spoke to him saying, 'I have not been created for this purpose, but for
ploughing." The people said, "Glorified be Allah." The Prophet said, "But I
believe in it and so does Abu Bakr end 'Umar."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 16:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "While I was sleeping, I saw myself standing
at a well, on it there was a bucket. I drew water from the well as much as
Allah wished. Then Ibn Abi Quhafa (i.e. Abu Bakr) took the bucket from me
and brought out one or two buckets (of water) and there was weakness in
his drawing the water. May Allah forgive his weakness for him. Then the
bucket turned into a very big one and Ibn Al-Khattab took it over and I had
never seen such a mighty person amongst the people as him in performing
such hard work, till the people drank to their satisfaction and watered their
camels that knelt down there."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 17:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
That Allah's Apostle said, "Allah will not look on the Day of Judgment at him
who drags his robe (behind him) out of pride." Abu Bakr said "One side of
my robe slacks down unless I get very cautious about it." Allah's Apostle
said, "But you do not do that with a pride."
Volume 5, Book 57, Number 18:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Anybody who spends a pair of something in
Allah's Cause will be called from all the gates of Paradise, "O Allah's slave!
This is good.' He who is amongst those who pray will be called from the gate
of the prayer (in Paradise) and he who is from the people of Jihad will be
called from the gate of Jihad, and he who is from those' who give in charity
(i.e. Zakat) will be called from the gate of charity, and he who is amongst
those who observe fast will be called from the gate of fasting, the gate of
Raiyan." Abu Bakr said, "He who is called from all those gates will need
nothing," He added, "Will anyone be called from all those gates, O Allah's
Apostle?" He said, "Yes, and I hope you will be among those, O Abu Bakr."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 19:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle died while Abu Bakr was at a place
called As-Sunah (Al-'Aliya) 'Umar stood up and said, "By Allah! Allah's
Apostle is not dead!" 'Umar (later on) said, "By Allah! Nothing occurred to
my mind except that." He said, "Verily! Allah will resurrect him and he will
cut the hands and legs of some men." Then Abu Bakr came and uncovered
the face of Allah's Apostle, kissed him and said, "Let my mother and father
be sacrificed for you, (O Allah's Apostle), you are good in life and in death.
By Allah in Whose Hands my life is, Allah will never make you taste death
twice." Then he went out and said, "O oath-taker! Don't be hasty." When
Abu Bakr spoke, 'Umar sat down. Abu Bakr praised and glorified Allah and
said, No doubt! Whoever worshipped Muhammad, then Muhammad is dead,
but whoever worshipped Allah, then Allah is Alive and shall never die." Then
he recited Allah's Statement.:-- "(O Muhammad) Verily you will die, and they
also will die." (39.30) He also recited:--
"Muhammad is no more than an Apostle; and indeed many Apostles have
passed away, before him, If he dies Or is killed, will you then Turn back on
your heels? And he who turns back On his heels, not the least Harm will he
do to Allah And Allah will give reward to those Who are grateful." (3.144)
The people wept loudly, and the Ansar were assembled with Sad bin 'Ubada
in the shed of Bani Saida. They said (to the emigrants). "There should be one
'Amir from us and one from you." Then Abu Bakr, Umar bin Al-Khattab and
Abu 'baida bin Al-Jarrah went to them. 'Umar wanted to speak but Abu Bakr
stopped him. 'Umar later on used to say, "By Allah, I intended only to say
something that appealed to me and I was afraid that Abu Bakr would not
speak so well. Then Abu Bakr spoke and his speech was very eloquent. He
said in his statement, "We are the rulers and you (Ansars) are the ministers
(i.e. advisers)," Hubab bin Al-Mundhir said, "No, by Allah we won't accept
this. But there must be a ruler from us and a ruler from you." Abu Bakr said,
"No, we will be the rulers and you will be the ministers, for they (i.e.
Quarish) are the best family amongst the 'Arabs and of best origin. So you
should elect either 'Umar or Abu 'Ubaida bin Al-Jarrah as your ruler." 'Umar
said (to Abu Bakr), "No but we elect you, for you are our chief and the best
amongst us and the most beloved of all of us to Allah's Apostle." So 'Umar
took Abu Bakr's hand and gave the pledge of allegiance and the people too
gave the pledge of allegiance to Abu Bakr. Someone said, "You have killed
Sad bin Ubada." 'Umar said, "Allah has killed him." 'Aisha said (in another
narration), ("When the Prophet was on his death-bed) he looked up and said
thrice, (Amongst) the Highest Companion (See Qur'an 4.69)' Aisha said,
Allah benefited the people by their two speeches. 'Umar frightened the
people some of whom were hypocrites whom Allah caused to abandon
Islam because of 'Umar's speech. Then Abu Bakr led the people to True
Guidance and acquainted them with the right path they were to follow so
that they went out reciting:-- "Muhammad is no more than an Apostle and
indeed many Apostles have passed away before him.." (3.144)

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 20:
Narrated Muhammad bin Al-Hanafiya:
I asked my father ('Ali bin Abi Talib), "Who are the best people after Allah's
Apostle ?" He said, "Abu Bakr." I asked, "Who then?" He said, "Then 'Umar. "
I was afraid he would say "Uthman, so I said, "Then you?" He said, "I am only
an ordinary person.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 21:
Narrated 'Aisha:
We went out with Allah's Apostle on one of his journeys till we reached AlBaida or Dhatul-Jaish where my necklace got broken (and lost). Allah's
Apostle stopped to search for it and the people too stopped with him. There
was no water at that place and they had no water with them. So they went
to Abu Bakr and said, "Don't you see what 'Aisha has done? She has made
Allah's Apostle and the people stop where there is no water and they have
no water with them. Abu Bakr came while Allah's Apostle was sleeping with
his head on my thigh and said, "You detained Allah Apostle and the people
where there is no water and they have no water." He then admonished me
and said what Allah wished and pinched me at my flanks with his hands, but
I did not move because the head of Allah's Apostle was on my thigh .
Allah's Apostle kept on sleeping till be got up in the morning and found no
water. Then Allah revealed the Divine Verse of Tayammum, and the people
performed Tayammum. Usaid bin AlHudair said. "O family of Abu Bakr! This
is not the first blessings of yours." We urged the camel on which I was
sitting to get up from its place and the necklace was found under it.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 22:
Narrated Abu Said:
The Prophet said, "Do not abuse my companions for if any one of you spent
gold equal to Uhud (in Allah's Cause) it would not be equal to a Mud or even
a half Mud spent by one of them."
Volume 5, Book 57, Number 23:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari:
I performed ablution in my house and then went out and said, "Today I shall
stick to Allah's Apostle and stay with him all this day of mine (in his service)."
I went to the Mosque and asked about the Prophet . They said, "He had
gone in this direction." So I followed his way, asking about him till he
entered a place called Bir Aris. I sat at its gate that was made of date-palm
leaves till the Prophet finished answering the call of nature and performed
ablution. Then I went up to him to see him sitting at the well of Aris at the
middle of its edge with his legs uncovered, hanging in the well. I greeted him
and went back and sat at the gate. I said, "Today I will be the gatekeeper of
the Prophet." Abu Bakr came and pushed the gate. I asked, "Who is it?" He
said, "Abu Bakr." I told him to wait, went in and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Abu
Bakr asks for permission to enter." He said, "Admit him and give him the
glad tidings that he will be in Paradise." So I went out and said to Abu Bakr,
"Come in, and Allah's Apostle gives you the glad tidings that you will be in
Paradise" Abu Bakr entered and sat on the right side of Allah's Apostle on
the built edge of the well and hung his legs n the well as the Prophet did and
uncovered his legs. I then returned and sat (at the gate). I had left my
brother performing ablution and he intended to follow me. So I said (to
myself). "If Allah wants good for so-and-so (i.e. my brother) He will bring
him here." Suddenly somebody moved the door. I asked, "Who is it?" He
said, "'Umar bin Al-Khattab." I asked him to wait, went to Allah's Apostle,
greeted him and said, 'Umar bin Al-Khattab asks the permission to enter."
He said, "Admit him, and give him the glad tidings that he will be in
Paradise." I went to "Umar and said "Come in, and Allah's Apostle, gives you
the glad tidings that you will be in Paradise." So he entered and sat beside
Allah's Apostle on the built edge of the well on the left side and hung his
legs in the well. I returned and sat (at the gate) and said, (to myself), "If
Allah wants good for so-and-so, He will bring him here." Somebody came
and moved the door. I asked "Who is it?" He replied, "Uthman bin Affan." I
asked him to wait and went to the Prophet and informed him. He said,
"Admit him, and give him the glad tidings of entering Paradise, I asked him
to wait and went to the Prophet and informed him. He said, "Admit him, and
give him the glad tidings of entering Paradise after a calamity that will befall
him." So I went up to him and said to him, "Come in; Allah's Apostle gives
you the glad tidings of entering Paradise after a calamity that will befall you.
"Uthman then came in and found that the built edge of the well was
occupied, so he sat opposite to the Prophet on the other side. Said bin AlMusaiyab said, "I interpret this (narration) in terms of their graves."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 24:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet once climbed the mountain of Uhud with Abu Bakr, 'Umar and
'Uthman. The mountain shook with them. The Prophet said (to the
mountain), "Be firm, O Uhud! For on you there are no more than a Prophet,
a Siddiq and two martyrs.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 25:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: Allah's Apostle said. "While (in a dream), I was
standing by a well, drawing water from it. Abu Bakr and 'Umar came to me.
Abu Bakr took the bucket (from me) and drew one or two buckets of water,
and there was some weakness

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 26:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
While I was standing amongst the people who were invoking Allah for Umar
bin Al-Khattab who was lying (dead) on his bed, a man behind me rested his
elbows on my shoulder and said, "(O 'Umar!) May Allah bestow His Mercy
on you. I always hoped that Allah will keep you with your two companions,
for I often heard Allah's Apostle saying, "I, Abu Bakr and 'Umar were
(somewhere). I, Abu Bakr and 'Umar did (something). I, Abu Bakr and 'Umar
set out.' So I hoped that Allah will keep you with both of them." I turned
back to see that the speaker was Ali bin Abi Talib.
Volume 5, Book 57, Number 27:
Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair:
I asked 'Abdullah bin 'Amr, "What was the worst thing the pagans did to
Allah's Apostle?" He said, "I saw 'Uqba bin Abi Mu'ait coming to the Prophet
while he was praying.' Uqba put his sheet round the Prophet's neck and
squeezed it very severely. Abu Bakr came and pulled 'Uqba away from the
Prophet and said, "Do you intend to kill a man just because he says: 'My Lord
is Allah, and he has brought forth to you the Evident Signs from your Lord?"

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 28:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "I saw myself (in a dream) entering Paradise, and behold! I
saw Ar-Rumaisa', Abu Talha's wife. I heard footsteps. I asked, Who is it?
Somebody said, 'It is Bilal ' Then I saw a palace and a lady sitting in its
courtyard. I asked, 'For whom is this palace?' Somebody replied, 'It is for
'Umar.' I intended to enter it and see it, but I thought of your ('Umar's) Ghira
(and gave up the attempt)." 'Umar said, "Let my parents be sacrificed for
you, O Allah's Apostle! How dare I think of my Ghira (self-respect) being
offended by you?

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 29:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
While we were with Allah's Apostle he said, "While I was sleeping, I saw
myself in Paradise, and suddenly I saw a woman performing ablution beside
a palace. I asked, 'For whom is this palace?' They replied, 'It is for 'Umar.'
Then I remembered 'Umar's Ghira (self-respect) and went away quickly."
Umar wept and Said, O Allah's Apostle! How dare I think of my ghira (selfrespect) being offended by you?
Volume 5, Book 57, Number 30:
Narrated Hamza's father:
Allah's Apostle said, "While I was sleeping, I saw myself drinking (i.e. milk),
and I was so contented that I saw the milk flowing through my nails. Then I
gave (the milk) to 'Umar." They (i.e. the companions of the Prophet) asked,
"What do you interpret it?" He said, "Knowledge."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 31:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "In a dream I saw myself drawing water from a well with a
bucket. Abu Bakr came and drew a bucket or two weakly. May Allah forgive
him. Then 'Umar bin Al-Khattab came and the bucket turned into a very
large one in his hands. I had never seen such a mighty person as he in doing
such hard work till all the people drank to their satisfaction and watered
their camels that knelt down there.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 32:
Narrated Sad bin Abi Waqqas:
Umar bin Al-Khattab asked the permission of Allah's Apostle to see him
while some Quraishi women were sitting with him, talking to him and asking
him for more expenses, raising their voices above the voice of Allah's
Apostle.
When 'Umar asked for the permission to enter, the women quickly put on
their veils. Allah' Apostle allowed him to enter and 'Umar came in while
Allah's Apostle was smiling, 'Umar said "O Allah's Apostle! May Allah always
keep you smiling." The Prophet said, "These women who have been here,
roused my wonder, for as soon as they heard your voice, they quickly put on
their veils. "'Umar said, "O Allah's Apostle! You have more right to be feared
by them than I." Then 'Umar addressed the women saying, "O enemies of
yourselves! You fear me more than you do Allah's Apostle ?" They said, "Yes,
for you are harsher and sterner than Allah's Apostle." Then Allah's Apostle
said, "O Ibn Al-Khattab! By Him in Whose Hands my life is! Never does Satan
find you going on a way, but he takes another way other than yours."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 33:
Narrated Abdullah:
We have been powerful since 'Umar embraced Islam.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 34:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
When (the dead body of) 'Umar was put on his deathbed, the people
gathered around him and invoked (Allah) and prayed for him before the
body was taken away, and I was amongst them. Suddenly I felt somebody
taking hold of my shoulder and found out that he was 'Ali bin Abi Talib. 'Ali
invoked Allah's Mercy for 'Umar and said, "O 'Umar! You have not left
behind you a person whose deeds I like to imitate and meet Allah with more
than I like your deeds. By Allah! I always thought that Allah would keep you
with your two companions, for very often I used to hear the Prophet saying,
'I, Abu Bakr and 'Umar went (somewhere); I, Abu Bakr and 'Umar entered
(somewhere); and I, Abu Bakr and 'Umar went out."'

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 35:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet ascended the mountain of Uhud and he was accompanied by
Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman. The mountain shook beneath them. The
Prophet hit it with his foot and said, "O Uhud ! Be firm, for on you there is
none but a Prophet, a Siddiq and a martyr (i.e. and two martyrs).
Volume 5, Book 57, Number 36:
Narrated Aslam:
Ibn 'Umar asked me about some matters concerning 'Umar. He said, "Since
Allah's Apostle died. I have never seen anybody more serious, hard working
and generous than 'Umar bin Al-Khattab (till the end of his life."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 37:
Narrated Anas:
A man asked the Prophet about the Hour (i.e. Day of Judgment) saying,
"When will the Hour be?" The Prophet said, "What have you prepared for
it?" The man said, "Nothing, except that I love Allah and His Apostle." The
Prophet said, "You will be with those whom you love." We had never been
so glad as we were on hearing that saying of the Prophet (i.e., "You will be
with those whom you love.") Therefore, I love the Prophet, Abu Bakr and
'Umar, and I hope that I will be with them because of my love for them
though my deeds are not similar to theirs.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 38:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Among the nations before you there used to be people
who were inspired (though they were not prophets). And if there is any of
such a persons amongst my followers, it is 'Umar."
Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet said, "Among the nation of Bani Israel
who lived before you, there were men who used to be inspired with
guidance though they were not prophets, and if there is any of such persons
amongst my followers, it is 'Umar."
Volume 5, Book 57, Number 39:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whilst a shepherd was amongst his sheep, a wolf
attacked them and took away a sheep. The shepherd chased it and got that
sheep freed from the wolf. The wolf turned towards the shepherd and said,
'Who will guard the sheep on the day of wild animals when it will have no
shepherd except myself?" The people said, "Glorified be Allah." The Prophet
said, "But I believe in it and so do Abu Bakr and 'Umar although Abu Bakr
and 'Umar were not present there (at the place of the event).

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 40:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "While I was sleeping, the people were
presented to me (in a dream). They were wearing shirts, some of which
were merely covering their (chests). and some were a bit longer. 'Umar was
presented before me and his shirt was so long that he was dragging it."
They asked, "How have you interpreted it, O Allah's Apostle?" He said,
"Religion."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 41:
Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:
When 'Umar was stabbed, he showed signs of agony. Ibn 'Abbas, as if
intending to encourage 'Umar, said to him, "O Chief of the believers! Never
mind what has happened to you, for you have been in the company of
Allah's Apostle and you kept good relations with him and you parted with
him while he was pleased with you. Then you were in the company of Abu
Bakr and kept good relations with him and you parted with him (i.e. he died)
while he was pleased with you. Then you were in the company of the
Muslims, and you kept good relations with them, and if you leave them, you
will leave them while they are pleased with you." 'Umar said, (to Ibn
"Abbas), "As for what you have said about the company of Allah's Apostle
and his being pleased with me, it is a favor, Allah did to me; and as for what
you have said about the company of Abu Bakr and his being pleased with
me, it is a favor Allah did to me; and concerning my impatience which you
see, is because of you and your companions. By Allah! If (at all) I had gold
equal to the earth, I would have ransomed myself with it from the
Punishment of Allah before I meet Him."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 42:
Narrated Abu Musa:
While I was with the Prophet in one of the gardens of Medina, a man came
and asked me to open the gate. The Prophet said to me, "Open the gate for
him and give him the glad tidings that he will enter Paradise." I opened (the
gate) for him, and behold! It was Abu Bakr. I informed him of the glad
tidings the Prophet had said, and he praised Allah. Then another man came
and asked me to open the gate. The Prophet said to me "Open (the gate)
and give him the glad tidings of entering Paradise." I opened (the gate) for
him, and behold! It was 'Umar. I informed him of what the Prophet had said,
and he praised Allah. Then another man came and asked me to open the
gate. The Prophet said to me. "Open (the gate) for him and inform him of
the glad tidings, of entering Paradise with a calamity which will befall him. "
Behold ! It was 'Uthman, I informed him of what Allah's Apostle had said. He
praised Allah and said, "I seek Allah's Aid."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 43:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Hisham:
We were with the Prophet while he was holding 'Umar bin Al-Khattab by the
hand.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 44:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet entered a garden and ordered me to guard its gate. A man
came and asked permission to enter. The Prophet said, "Admit him and give
him the glad tidings of entering Paradise." Behold! It was Abu Bakr. Another
man came and asked the permission to enter. The Prophet said, "Admit him
and give him the glad tidings of entering Paradise." Behold! It was 'Umar.
Then another man came, asking the permission to enter. The Prophet kept
silent for a short while and then said, "Admit him and give him the glad
tidings of entering Paradise with a calamity which will befall him." Behold! It
was 'Uthman bin 'Affan. 'Asim, in another narration, said that the Prophet
was sitting in a place where there was water, and he was uncovering both
his knees or his knee, and when 'Uthman entered, he covered them (or it).

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 45:
Narrated 'Ubaid-ullah bin 'Adi bin Al-Khiyar:
Al-Miswar bin Makhrama and 'Abdur-Rahman bin Al-Aswad bin 'Abu
Yaghuth said (to me), "What forbids you to talk to 'Uthman about his
brother Al-Walid because people have talked much about him?" So I went to
'Uthman and when he went out for prayer I said (to him), "I have something
to say to you and it is a piece of advice for you " 'Uthman said, "O man, from
you." (Umar said: I see that he said, "I seek Refuge with Allah from you.") So
I left him and went to them. Then the messenger of Uthman came and I
went to him (i.e. 'Uthman), 'Uthman asked, "What is your advice?" I replied,
"Allah sent Muhammad with the Truth, and revealed the Divine Book (i.e.
Quran) to him; and you were amongst those who followed Allah and His
Apostle, and you participated in the two migrations (to Ethiopia and to
Medina) and enjoyed the company of Allah's Apostle and saw his way. No
doubt, the people are talking much about Al-Walid." 'Uthman said, "Did you
receive your knowledge directly from Allah's Apostle ?" I said, "No, but his
knowledge did reach me and it reached (even) to a virgin in her seclusion."
'Uthman said, "And then Allah sent Muhammad with the Truth and I was
amongst those who followed Allah and His Apostle and I believed in what
ever he (i.e. the Prophet) was sent with, and participated in two migrations,
as you have said, and I enjoyed the company of Allah's Apostle and gave the
pledge of allegiance him. By Allah! I never disobeyed him, nor did I cheat him
till Allah took him unto Him. Then I treated Abu Bakr and then 'Umar
similarly and then I was made Caliph. So, don't I have rights similar to
theirs?" I said, "Yes." He said, "Then what are these talks reaching me from
you people? Now, concerning what you mentioned about the question of AlWalid, Allah willing, I shall deal with him according to what is right." Then he
called 'Ali and ordered him to flog him, and 'Ali flogged him (i.e. Al-Walid)
eighty lashes.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 46:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle ascended the (mountain) of Uhud with Abu Bakr and
'Uthman and it shook. Allah's Apostle said, "Be calm, O Uhud!" I think he
stroked it with his foot and added, "There is none on you but a Prophet, a
Siddiq and two martyrs." (The two martyrs were Umar and Uthman) (See
Hadith No. 24)

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 47:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
During the lifetime of the Prophet we considered Abu Bakr as peerless and
then 'Umar and then 'Uthman (coming next to him in superiority) and then
we used not to differentiate between the companions of the Prophet

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 48:
Narrated 'Uthman:
(the son of Muhib) An Egyptian who came and performed the Hajj to the
Kaba saw some people sitting. He enquire, "Who are these people?"
Somebody said, "They are the tribe of Quraish." He said, "Who is the old
man sitting amongst them?" The people replied, "He is 'Abdullah bin 'Umar."
He said, "O Ibn Umar! I want to ask you about something; please tell me
about it. Do you know that 'Uthman fled away on the day (of the battle) of
Uhud?" Ibn 'Umar said, "Yes." The (Egyptian) man said, "Do you know that
'Uthman was absent on the day (of the battle) of Badr and did not join it?"
Ibn 'Umar said, "Yes." The man said, "Do you know that he failed to attend
the Ar Ridwan pledge and did not witness it (i.e. Hudaibiya pledge of
allegiance)?" Ibn 'Umar said, "Yes." The man said, "Allahu Akbar!" Ibn 'Umar
said, "Let me explain to you (all these three things). As for his flight on the
day of Uhud, I testify that Allah has excused him and forgiven him; and as
for his absence from the battle of Badr, it was due to the fact that the
daughter of Allah's Apostle was his wife and she was sick then. Allah's
Apostle said to him, "You will receive the same reward and share (of the
booty) as anyone of those who participated in the battle of Badr (if you stay
with her).' As for his absence from the Ar-Ridwan pledge of allegiance, had
there been any person in Mecca more respectable than 'Uthman (to be sent
as a representative). Allah's Apostle would have sent him instead of him. No
doubt, Allah's Apostle had sent him, and the incident of the Ar-Ridwan
pledge of Allegiance happened after 'Uthman had gone to Mecca. Allah's
Apostle held out his right hand saying, 'This is 'Uthman's hand.' He stroke his
(other) hand with it saying, 'This (pledge of allegiance) is on the behalf of
'Uthman.' Then Ibn 'Umar said to the man, 'Bear (these) excuses in mind
with you.'

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 49:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet ascended the mountain of Uhud and Abu Bakr, 'Umar and
'Uthman were accompanying him. The mountain gave a shake (i.e. trembled
underneath them) . The Prophet said, "O Uhud ! Be calm." I think that the
Prophet hit it with his foot, adding, "For upon you there are none but a
Prophet, a Siddiq and two martyrs."
Volume 5, Book 57, Number 50:
Narrated 'Amr bin Maimun:
I saw 'Umar bin Al-Khattab a few days before he was stabbed in Medina. He
was standing with Hudhaifa bin Al-Yaman and 'Uthman bin Hunaif to whom
he said, "What have you done? Do you think that you have imposed more
taxation on the land (of As-Swad i.e. 'Iraq) than it can bear?" They replied,
"We have imposed on it what it can bear because of its great yield." 'Umar
again said, "Check whether you have imposed on the land what it can not
bear." They said, "No, (we haven't)." 'Umar added, "If Allah should keep me
alive I will let the widows of Iraq need no men to support them after me."
But only four days had elapsed when he was stabbed (to death ). The day he
was stabbed, I was standing and there was nobody between me and him
(i.e. Umar) except Abdullah bin 'Abbas. Whenever Umar passed between
the two rows, he would say, "Stand in straight lines."
When he saw no defect (in the rows), he would go forward and start the
prayer with Takbir. He would recite Surat Yusuf or An-Nahl or the like in the
first Rak'a so that the people may have the time to Join the prayer. As soon
as he said Takbir, I heard him saying, "The dog has killed or eaten me," at the
time he (i.e. the murderer) stabbed him. A non-Arab infidel proceeded on
carrying a double-edged knife and stabbing all the persons he passed by on
the right and left (till) he stabbed thirteen persons out of whom seven died.
When one of the Muslims saw that, he threw a cloak on him. Realizing that
he had been captured, the non-Arab infidel killed himself, 'Umar held the
hand of 'Abdur-Rahman bin Auf and let him lead the prayer.
Those who were standing by the side of 'Umar saw what I saw, but the
people who were in the other parts of the Mosque did not see anything, but
they lost the voice of 'Umar and they were saying, "Subhan Allah! Subhan
Allah! (i.e. Glorified be Allah)." Abdur-Rahman bin Auf led the people a short
prayer. When they finished the prayer, 'Umar said, "O Ibn 'Abbas! Find out
who attacked me." Ibn 'Abbas kept on looking here and there for a short
time and came to say. "The slave of Al Mughira." On that 'Umar said, "The
craftsman?" Ibn 'Abbas said, "Yes." 'Umar said, "May Allah curse him. I did
not treat him unjustly. All the Praises are for Allah Who has not caused me to
die at the hand of a man who claims himself to be a Muslim. No doubt, you
and your father (Abbas) used to love to have more non-Arab infidels in
Medina." Al-Abbas had the greatest number of slaves. Ibn 'Abbas said to
'Umar. "If you wish, we will do." He meant, "If you wish we will kill them."
'Umar said, "You are mistaken (for you can't kill them) after they have
spoken your language, prayed towards your Qibla, and performed Hajj like
yours."
Then Umar was carried to his house, and we went along with him, and the
people were as if they had never suffered a calamity before. Some said, "Do
not worry (he will be Alright soon)." Some said, "We are afraid (that he will
die)." Then an infusion of dates was brought to him and he drank it but it
came out (of the wound) of his belly. Then milk was brought to him and he
drank it, and it also came out of his belly. The people realized that he would
die. We went to him, and the people came, praising him. A young man came
saying, "O chief of the believers! Receive the glad tidings from Allah to you
due to your company with Allah's Apostle and your superiority in Islam
which you know. Then you became the ruler (i.e. Caliph) and you ruled with
justice and finally you have been martyred." 'Umar said, "I wish that all these
privileges will counterbalance (my shortcomings) so that I will neither lose
nor gain anything."
When the young man turned back to leave, his clothes seemed to be
touching the ground. 'Umar said, "Call the young man back to me." (When
he came back) 'Umar said, "O son of my brother! Lift your clothes, for this
will keep your clothes clean and save you from the Punishment of your
Lord." 'Umar further said, "O 'Abdullah bin 'Umar! See how much I am in
debt to others." When the debt was checked, it amounted to approximately
eighty-six thousand. 'Umar said, "If the property of 'Umar's family covers
the debt, then pay the debt thereof; otherwise request it from Bani 'Adi bin
Ka'b, and if that too is not sufficient, ask for it from Quraish tribe, and do not
ask for it from any one else, and pay this debt on my behalf."
'Umar then said (to 'Abdullah), "Go to 'Aisha (the mother of the believers)
and say: "Umar is paying his salutation to you. But don't say: 'The chief of
the believers,' because today I am not the chief of the believers. And say:
"Umar bin Al-Khattab asks the permission to be buried with his two
companions (i.e. the Prophet, and Abu Bakr)." Abdullah greeted 'Aisha and
asked for the permission for entering, and then entered to her and found
her sitting and weeping. He said to her, "'Umar bin Al-Khattab is paying his
salutations to you, and asks the permission to be buried with his two
companions." She said, "I had the idea of having this place for myself, but
today I prefer Umar to myself." When he returned it was said (to 'Umar),
"'Abdullah bin 'Umar has come." 'Umar said, "Make me sit up." Somebody
supported him against his body and 'Umar asked ('Abdullah), "What news
do you have?" He said, "O chief of the believers! It is as you wish. She has
given the permission." 'Umar said, "Praise be to Allah, there was nothing
more important to me than this. So when I die, take me, and greet 'Aisha
and say: "Umar bin Al-Khattab asks the permission (to be buried with the
Prophet ), and if she gives the permission, bury me there, and if she refuses,
then take me to the grave-yard of the Muslims."
Then Hafsa (the mother of the believers) came with many other women
walking with her. When we saw her, we went away. She went in (to 'Umar)
and wept there for sometime. When the men asked for permission to enter,
she went into another place, and we heard her weeping inside. The people
said (to 'Umar), "O chief of the believers! Appoint a successor." Umar said,
"I do not find anyone more suitable for the job than the following persons
or group whom Allah's Apostle had been pleased with before he died." Then
'Umar mentioned 'Ali, 'Uthman, AzZubair, Talha, Sad and 'Abdur-Rahman
(bin Auf) and said, "Abdullah bin 'Umar will be a witness to you, but he will
have no share in the rule. His being a witness will compensate him for not
sharing the right of ruling. If Sad becomes the ruler, it will be alright:
otherwise, whoever becomes the ruler should seek his help, as I have not
dismissed him because of disability or dishonesty." 'Umar added, "I
recommend that my successor takes care of the early emigrants; to know
their rights and protect their honor and sacred things.
I also recommend that he be kind to the Ansar who had lived in Medina
before the emigrants and Belief had entered their hearts before them. I
recommend that the (ruler) should accept the good of the righteous among
them and excuse their wrong-doers, and I recommend that he should do
good to all the people of the towns (Al-Ansar), as they are the protectors of
Islam and the source of wealth and the source of annoyance to the enemy. I
also recommend that nothing be taken from them except from their surplus
with their consent. I also recommend that he do good to the 'Arab bedouin,
as they are the origin of the 'Arabs and the material of Islam. He should take
from what is inferior, amongst their properties and distribute that to the
poor amongst them. I also recommend him concerning Allah's and His
Apostle's protectees (i.e. Dhimmis) to fulfill their contracts and to fight for
them and not to overburden them with what is beyond their ability." So
when 'Umar expired, we carried him out and set out walking. 'Abdullah bin
'Umar greeted ('Aisha) and said, "'Umar bin Al-Khattab asks for the
permission." 'Aisha said, "Bring him in." He was brought in and buried
beside his two companions.
When he was buried, the group (recommended by 'Umar) held a meeting.
Then 'Abdur-Rahman said, " Reduce the candidates for rulership to three of
you." Az-Zubair said, "I give up my right to Ali." Talha said, "I give up my
right to 'Uthman," Sad, 'I give up my right to 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf."
'Abdur-Rahman then said (to 'Uthman and 'Ali), "Now which of you is willing
to give up his right of candidacy to that he may choose the better of the
(remaining) two, bearing in mind that Allah and Islam will be his witnesses."
So both the sheiks (i.e. 'Uthman and 'Ali) kept silent. 'Abdur-Rahman said,
"Will you both leave this matter to me, and I take Allah as my Witness that I
will not choose but the better of you?" They said, "Yes." So 'Abdur-Rahman
took the hand of one of them (i.e. 'Ali) and said, "You are related to Allah's
Apostle and one of the earliest Muslims as you know well. So I ask you by
Allah to promise that if I select you as a ruler you will do justice, and if I
select 'Uthman as a ruler you will listen to him and obey him." Then he took
the other (i.e. 'Uthman) aside and said the same to him. When 'AbdurRahman secured (their agreement to) this covenant, he said, "O 'Uthman!
Raise your hand." So he (i.e. 'Abdur-Rahman) gave him (i.e. 'Uthman) the
solemn pledge, and then 'Ali gave him the pledge of allegiance and then all
the (Medina) people gave him the pledge of allegiance.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 51:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
Allah's Apostle said, "Tomorrow I will give the flag to a man with whose
leadership Allah will grant (the Muslim) victory." So the people kept on
thinking the whole night as to who would be given the flag. The next
morning the people went to Allah's Apostle and every one of them hoped
that he would be given the flag. The Prophet said, "Where is Ali bin Abi
Talib?" The people replied, "He is suffering from eye trouble, O Allah's
Apostle." He said, "Send for him and bring him to me." So when 'Ali came,
the Prophet spat in his eyes and invoked good on him, and he became
alright as if he had no ailment. The Prophet then gave him the flag. 'Ali said,
"O Allah's Apostle! Shall I fight them (i.e. enemy) till they become like us?"
The Prophet said, "Proceed to them steadily till you approach near to them
and then invite them to Islam and inform them of their duties towards Allah
which Islam prescribes for them, for by Allah, if one man is guided on the
right path (i.e. converted to Islam) through you, it would be better for you
than (a great number of) red camels."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 52:
Narrated Salama:
Ali happened to stay behind the Prophet and (did not join him) during the
battle of Khaibar for he was having eye trouble. Then he said, "How could I
remain behind Allah's Apostle?" So 'Ali set out following the Prophet , When
it was the eve of the day in the morning of which Allah helped (the Muslims)
to conquer it, Allah's Apostle said, "I will give the flag (to a man), or
tomorrow a man whom Allah and His Apostle love will take the flag," or
said, "A man who loves Allah and His Apostle; and Allah will grant victory
under his leadership." Suddenly came 'Ali whom we did not expect. The
people said, "This is 'Ali." Allah's Apostle gave him the flag and Allah granted
victory under his leadership.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 53:
Narrated Abu Hazim:
A man came to Sahl bin Sad and said, "This is so-and-so," meaning the
Governor of Medina, "He is calling 'Ali bad names near the pulpit." Sahl
asked, "What is he saying?" He (i.e. the man) replied, "He calls him (i.e. 'Ali)
Abu Turab." Sahl laughed and said, "By Allah, none but the Prophet called
him by this name and no name was dearer to 'Ali than this." So I asked Sahl
to tell me more, saying, "O Abu 'Abbas! How (was this name given to 'Ali)?"
Sahl said, "'Ali went to Fatima and then came out and slept in the Mosque.
The Prophet asked Fatima, "Where is your cousin?" She said, "In the
Mosque." The Prophet went to him and found that his (i.e. Ali's) covering
sheet had slipped of his back and dust had soiled his back. The Prophet
started wiping the dust off his back and said twice, "Get up! O Abu Turab
(i.e. O. man with the dust)."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 54:
Narrated Sad bin 'Ubaida:
A man came to Ibn 'Umar and asked about 'Uthman and Ibn 'Umar
mentioned his good deeds and said to the questioner. "Perhaps these facts
annoy you?" The other said, "Yes." Ibn 'Umar said, "May Allah stick your
nose in the dust (i.e. degrade you)!' Then the man asked him about 'Ali. Ibn
'Umar mentioned his good deeds and said, "It is all true, and that is his
house in the midst of the houses of the Prophet. Perhaps these facts have
hurt you?" The questioner said, "Yes." Ibn 'Umar said, "May Allah stick your
nose in the dust (i.e. degrade you or make you do things which you hate) !
Go away and do whatever you can against me."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 55:
Narrated 'Ali:
Fatima complained of the suffering caused to her by the hand mill. Some
Captives were brought to the Prophet, she came to him but did not find him
at home 'Aisha was present there to whom she told (of her desire for a
servant). When the Prophet came, Aisha informed him about Fatima's visit.
Ali added "So the Prophet came to us, while we had gone to our bed I
wanted to get up but the Prophet said, "Remain at your place". Then he sat
down between us till I found the coolness of his feet on my chest. Then he
said, "Shall I teach you a thing which is better than what you have asked me?
When you go to bed, say, 'Allahu-Akbar' thirty-four times, and 'Subhan Allah
thirty-three times, and 'Alhamdu-lillah thirty-three times for that is better for
you both than a servant."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 56:
Narrated Ubaida:
Ali said (to the people of 'Iraq), "Judge as you used to judge, for I hate
differences (and I do my best ) till the people unite as one group, or I die as
my companions have died." And narrated Sad that the Prophet said to 'Ali,
"Will you not be pleased from this that you are to me like Aaron was to
Moses?"

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 57:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The people used to say, "Abu Huraira narrates too many narrations." In fact I
used to keep close to Allah's Apostle and was satisfied with what filled my
stomach. I ate no leavened bread and dressed no decorated striped clothes,
and never did a man or a woman serve me, and I often used to press my
belly against gravel because of hunger, and I used to ask a man to recite a
Quranic Verse to me although I knew it, so that he would take me to his
home and feed me. And the most generous of all the people to the poor
was Ja'far bin Abi Talib. He used to take us to his home and offer us what
was available therein. He would even offer us an empty folded leather
container (of butter) which we would split and lick whatever was in it.
Volume 5, Book 57, Number 58:
Narrated Ash-Sha'bi:
Whenever Ibn 'Umar greeted Ibn Jafar, he used to say: "As-salamu-'Alaika
(i.e. Peace be on you) O son of Dhu-l-Janahain (son of the two-winged
person)."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 59:
Narrated Anas:
Whenever there was drought, 'Umar bin Al-Khattab used to ask Allah for
rain through Al'Abbas bin 'Abdul Muttalib, saying, "O Allah! We used to
request our Prophet to ask You for rain, and You would give us. Now we
request the uncle of our Prophet to ask You for rain, so give us rain." And
they would be given rain."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 60:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Fatima sent somebody to Abu Bakr asking him to give her her inheritance
from the Prophet from what Allah had given to His Apostle through Fai (i.e.
booty gained without fighting). She asked for the Sadaqa (i.e. wealth
assigned for charitable purposes) of the Prophet at Medina, and Fadak, and
what remained of the Khumus (i.e., one-fifth) of the Khaibar booty. Abu
Bakr said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'We (Prophets), our property is not
inherited, and whatever we leave is Sadaqa, but Muhammad's Family can
eat from this property, i.e. Allah's property, but they have no right to take
more than the food they need.' By Allah! I will not bring any change in
dealing with the Sadaqa of the Prophet (and will keep them) as they used to
be observed in his (i.e. the Prophet's) life-time, and I will dispose with it as
Allah's Apostle used to do," Then 'Ali said, "I testify that None has the right
to be worshipped but Allah, and that Muhammad is His Apostle," and added,
"O Abu Bakr! We acknowledge your superiority." Then he (i.e. 'Ali)
mentioned their own relationship to Allah's Apostle and their right. Abu
Bakr then spoke saying, "By Allah in Whose Hands my life is. I love to do
good to the relatives of Allah's Apostle rather than to my own relatives" Abu
Bark added: Look at Muhammad through his family (i.e. if you are no good
to his family you are not good to him).

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 61:
Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:
Allah's Apostle said, "Fatima is a part of me, and he who makes her angry,
makes me angry."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 62:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet called his daughter Fatima during his illness in which he died,
and told her a secret whereupon she wept. Then he called her again and told
her a secret whereupon she laughed. When I asked her about that, she
replied, "The Prophet spoke to me in secret and informed me that he would
die in the course of the illness during which he died, so I wept. He again
spoke to me in secret and informed me that I would be the first of his family
to follow him (after his death) and on that I laughed."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 63:
Narrated Marwan bin Al-Hakam:
'Uthman bin 'Affan was afflicted with severe nose-bleeding in the year when
such illness was prevelant and that prevented him from performing Hajj, and
(because of it) he made his will. A man from Quraish came to him and said,
"Appoint your successor." 'Uthman asked, "Did the people name him? (i.e.
the successor) the man said, "Yes." Uthman asked, "Who is that?" The man
remained silent. Another man came to 'Uthman and I think it was Al-Harith.
He also said, "Appoint your successor." 'Uthman asked, "Did the people
name him?" The man replied "Yes." 'Uthman said, "Who is that?" The man
remained silent. 'Uthman said, "Perhaps they have mentioned Az-Zubair?"
The man said, "Yes." 'Uthman said, "By Him in Whose Hands my life is, he is
the best of them as I know, and the dearest of them to Allah's Apostle ."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 64:
Narrated Marwan bin Al-Hakam:
While I was with 'Uthman, a man came to him and said, "Appoint your
successor." 'Uthman said, "Has such successor been named?" He replied,
"Yes, Az-Zubair." 'Uthman said, thrice, "By Allah! Indeed you know that he is
the best of you."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 65:
Narrated Jabir:
The Prophet said, "Every prophet used to have a Hawari (i.e. disciple), and
my Hawari is Az-Zubair bin Al-'Awwam."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 66:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair:
During the battle of Al-Ahzab, I and 'Umar bin Abi-Salama were kept behind
with the women. Behold! I saw (my father) Az-Zubair riding his horse, going
to and coming from Bani Quraiza twice or thrice. So when I came back I said,
"O my father! I saw you going to and coming from Bani Quraiza?" He said,
"Did you really see me, O my son?" I said, "Yes." He said, "Allah's Apostle
said, 'Who will go to Bani Quraiza and bring me their news?' So I went, and
when I came back, Allah's Apostle mentioned for me both his parents
saying, "Let my father and mother be sacrificed for you."'
Volume 5, Book 57, Number 67:
Narrated 'Urwa:
On the day of the battle of Al-Yarmuk, the companions of the Prophet said
to Az-Zubair, "Will you attack the enemy vigorously so that we may attack
them along with you?" So Az-Zubair attacked them, and they inflicted two
wounds over his shoulder, and in between these two wounds there was an
old scar he had received on the day of the battle of Badr When I was a child,
I used to insert my fingers into those scars in play.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 68:
Narrated 'Umar:
"Before the Prophet died, he was pleased with him (Talha bin 'Ubaidullah)."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 69:
Narrated Abu 'Uthman:
During one of the Ghazawat in which Allah's Apostle was fighting, none
remained with the Prophet but Talha and Sad.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 70:
Narrated Qais bin Abi Hazim:
I saw Talha's paralyzed hand with which he had protected the Prophet
(from an arrow) .

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 71:
Narrated Sad: On the day of the battle of Uhud the Prophet mentioned for
me both hi
Volume 5, Book 57, Number 72:
Narrated Sad:
No doubt, (for some time) I stood for one-third of the Muslims.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 73:
Narrated Sad bin Abi Waqqas:
No man embraced Islam before the day on which I embraced Islam, and no
doubt, I remained for seven days as one third of the then extant Muslims.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 74:
Narrated Qais:
I heard Sad saying, "I was the first amongst the 'Arabs who shot an arrow
for Allah's Cause. We used to fight along with the Prophets, while we had
nothing to eat except the leaves of trees so that one's excrete would look
like the excrete balls of camel or a sheep, containing nothing to mix them
together. Today Banu Asad tribe blame me for not having understood Islam.
I would be a loser if my deeds were in vain." Those people complained about
Sad to 'Umar, claiming that he did not offer his prayers perfectly.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 75:
Narrated about the sons-in-law of the Prophet and one of them is Abu Al-'As
bin Ar-Rabi'.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 76:
Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:
'Ali demanded the hand of the daughter of Abu Jahl. Fatima heard of this
and went to Allah's Apostle saying, "Your people think that you do not
become angry for the sake of your daughters as 'Ali is now going to marry
the daughter of Abu Jahl. "On that Allah's Apostle got up and after his
recitation of Tashah-hud. I heard him saying, "Then after! I married one of
my daughters to Abu Al-'As bin Al-Rabi' (the husband of Zainab, the
daughter of the Prophet ) before Islam and he proved truthful in whatever
he said to me. No doubt, Fatima is a part of me, I hate to see her being
troubled. By Allah, the daughter of Allah's Apostle and the daughter of
Allah's Enemy cannot be the wives of one man." So 'Ali gave up that
engagement.
'Al-Miswar further said: I heard the Prophet talking and he mentioned a sonin-law of his belonging to the tribe of Bani 'Abd-Shams. He highly praised
him concerning that relationship and said (whenever) he spoke to me, he
spoke the truth, and whenever he promised me, he fulfilled his promise."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 77:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
The Prophet sent an army under the command of Usama bin Zaid. When
some people criticized his leadership, the Prophet said, "If you are criticizing
Usama's leadership, you used to criticize his father's leadership before. By
Allah! He was worthy of leadership and was one of the dearest persons to
me, and (now) this (i.e. Usama) is one of the dearest to me after him (i.e.
Zaid)."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 78:
Narrated Urwa:
Aisha said, "A Qaif (i.e. one skilled in recognizing the lineage of a person
through Physiognomy and through examining the body parts of an infant)
came to me while the Prophet was present, and Usama bin Zaid and Zaid bin
Haritha were Lying asleep. The Qa'if said. These feet (of Usama and his
father) are of persons belonging to the same lineage.' " The Prophet was
pleased with that saying which won his admiration, and he told 'Aisha of it.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 79:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The people of the Quraish tribe were worried about the Makhzumiya
woman. They said. "Nobody dare speak to him (i.e. the Prophet ) except
Usama bin Zaid as he is the most beloved to Allah's Apostle." Aisha said, "A
woman from Bani Makhzumiya committed a theft and the people said, 'Who
can intercede with the Prophet for her?' So nobody dared speak to him (i.e.
the Prophet) but Usama bin Zaid spoke to him. The Prophet said, 'If a
reputable man amongst the children of Bani Israel committed a theft, they
used to forgive him, but if a poor man committed a theft, they would cut his
hand. But I would cut even the hand of Fatima (i.e. the daughter of the
Prophet) if she committed a theft."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 80:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Dinar:
One day Ibn 'Umar, while in the Mosque, looked at a man who was dragging
his clothes while walking in one of the corners of the Mosque He said, "See
who is that. I wish he was near to me." Somebody then said (to Ibn 'Umar),
"Don't you know him, O Abu 'Abdur-Rahman? He is Muhammad bin Usama."
On that Ibn 'Umar bowed his head and dug the earth with his hands and
then, said, "If Allah's Apostle saw him, he would have loved him."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 81:
Narrated Usama bin Zaid:
That the Prophet used to take him (i.e. Usama) and Al-Hassan (in his lap) and
say: "O Allah! Love them, as I love them." The freed slave of Usama bin Zaid
said, "Al-Hajjaj bin Aiman bin Um Aiman and Aiman Ibn Um Aiman was
Usama's brother from the maternal side, and he was one of the Ansar. He
was seen by Ibn 'Umar not performing his bowing and prostrations in a
perfect manner. So Ibn 'Umar told him to repeat his prayer. Harmala, the
freed slave of Usama bin Zaid said that while he was in the company of
'Abdullah bin 'Umar, Al-Hajjaj bin Aiman came in and (while praying) he did
not perform his bowing and prostrations properly. So Ibn 'Umar told him to
repeat his prayer. When he went away, Ibn 'Umar asked me, "Who is he?" I
said, "Al-Hajjaj bin Um Aiman." Ibn 'Umar said, "If Allah's Apostle saw him,
he would have loved him." Then Ibn 'Umar mentioned the love of the
Prophet for the children of Um Aimn. Sulaiman said that Um Aiman was one
of the nurses of the Prophet.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 83:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
If a man saw a dream during the lifetime of the Prophet he would narrate it
to the Prophet. Once I wished to see a dream and narrate it to the Prophet I
was young, unmarried, and used to sleep in the Mosque during the lifetime
of the Prophet. I dreamt that two angels took me and went away with me
towards the (Hell) Fire which looked like a well with the inside walls built up,
and had two side-walls like those of a well. There I saw some people in it
whom I knew. I started saying, "I seek Refuge with Allah from the (Hell) Fire,
I seek Refuge with Allah from the (Hell) Fire." Then another angel met the
other two and said to me, "Do not be afraid." I narrated my dream to Hafsa
who, in her turn, narrated it to the Prophet. He said, "What an excellent man
Abdullah is if he only observes the night prayer." (Salem, a sub-narrator said,
"Abdullah used not to sleep at night but very little hence forward."
Volume 5, Book 57, Number 84:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar from Hafsa his sister:
That the Prophet had said to her, "'Abdullah is a pious man."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 85:
Narrated 'Alqama:
I went to Sham and offered a two-Rak'at prayer and then said, "O Allah!
Bless me with a good pious companion." So I went to some people and sat
with them. An old man came and sat by my side. I asked, "Who is he?" They
replied, "(He is) Abu-Ad-Darda.' I said (to him), "I prayed to Allah to bless me
with a pious companion and He sent you to me." He asked me, "From where
are you?" I replied, "From the people of Al-Kufa." He said, "Isn't there
amongst you Ibn Um 'Abd, the one who used to carry the shoes, the
cushion(or pillow) and the water for ablution? Is there amongst you the one
whom Allah gave Refuge from Satan through the request of His Prophet. Is
there amongst you the one who keeps the secrets of the Prophet which
nobody knows except him?" Abu Darda further asked, "How does 'Abdullah
(bin Mas'ud) recite the Sura starting with, 'By the Night as it conceals (the
light)." (92.1) Then I recited before him:
'By the Night as it envelops: And by the Day as it appears in brightness; And
by male and female.' (91.1-3) On this Abu Ad-Darda' said, "By Allah, the
Prophet made me recite the Sura in this way while I was listening to him
(reciting it)."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 86:
Narrated Ibrahim: 'Alqama went to Sham and when he entered the mosque,
he said, "O Allah ! Bless me with a pious companion." So he sat with Abu AdDarda. Abu Ad-Darda' asked him, "Where are you from?" 'Alqama replied,
"From the people of Kufa." Abu Ad
Volume 5, Book 57, Number 87:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, " Every nation has an extremely trustworthy man, and
the trustworthy man of this (i.e. Muslim) nation is Abu 'Ubaida bin AlJarrah."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 88:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
The Prophet said to the people of Nijran, "I will send you the most
trustworthy man." (Every one of) the companions of the Prophet was
looking forward (to be that person). He then sent Abu 'Ubaida.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 89:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
I heard the Prophet talking at the pulpit while Al-Hasan was sitting beside
him, and he (i.e. the Prophet ) was once looking at the people and at
another time Al-Hasan, and saying, "This son of mine is a Saiyid (i.e. chief)
and perhaps Allah will bring about an agreement between two sects of the
Muslims through him."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 90:
Narrated Usama bin Zaid:
That the Prophet used to take him and Al-Hasan, and used to say, "O Allah! I
love them, so please love them," or said something similar.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 91:
Narrated Muhammad:
Anas bin Malik said, "The head of Al-Husain was brought to 'Ubaidullah bin
Ziyad and was put in a tray, and then Ibn Ziyad started playing with a stick at
the nose and mouth of Al-Husain's head and saying something about his
handsome features." Anas then said (to him), "Al-Husain resembled the
Prophet more than the others did." Anas added, "His (i.e. Al-Husain's) hair
was dyed with Wasma (i.e. a kind of plant used as a dye)."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 92:
Narrated Al-Bara:
I saw the Prophet carrying Al-Hasan on his shoulder an saying, "O Allah! I
love him, so please love him."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 93:
Narrated 'Uqba bin Al-Harith:
I saw Abu Bakr carrying Al-Hasan and saying, "Let my father be sacrificed for
you; you resemble the Prophet and not 'Ali," while 'Ali was laughing at this.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 94:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Abu Bakr used to say, "Please Muhammad (i.e. the Prophet) by doing good
to his family."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 95:
Narrated Anas:
None resembled the Prophet more than Al-Hasan bin 'Ali did.
Volume 5, Book 57, Number 96:
Narrated Ibn Abi Nu'm:
A person asked 'Abdullah bin 'Umar whether a Muslim could kill flies. I heard
him saying (in reply). "The people of Iraq are asking about the killing of flies
while they themselves murdered the son of the daughter of Allah's Apostle .
The Prophet said, They (i.e. Hasan and Husain) are my two sweet basils in
this world."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 97:
Narrated the merits of Bilal bin Rabah the freed slave of Abu Bakr. The
Prophet said (to Bilal), "I heard the sound of your shoes in Paradise just in
front of me."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 98:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Umar used to say, "Abu Bakr is our chief, and he manumitted our chief,"
meaning Bilal.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 99:
Narrated Qais:
Bilal said to Abu Bakr, "If you have bought me for yourself then keep me (for
yourself), but if you have bought me for Allah's Sake, then leave me for
Allah's Work."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 100:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Once the Prophet embraced me (pressed me to his chest) and said, "O Allah,
teach him wisdom (i.e. the understanding of the knowledge of Qur'an)."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 101r:
Narrated 'Abdul Warith:
The same but said, "O Allah, teach him (Ibn Abbas) the Book (i.e. the
understanding of the knowledge of Qur'an)."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 101a:
Narrated Khalid:
As above.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 102:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet had informed the people about the death of Zaid, Ja'far and Ibn
Rawaha before the news of their death reached them. He said with his eyes
flowing with tears, "Zaid took the flag and was martyred; then Ja'far took
the flag and was martyred, and then Ibn Rawaha took the flag and was
martyred. Finally the flag was taken by one of Allah's Swords (i.e. Khalid bin
Al-Walid) and Allah gave them (i.e. the Muslims) victory."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 103:
Narrated Masruq:
'Abdullah (bin Mas'ud) was mentioned before 'Abdullah bin 'Amr. The latter
said, "That is a man I continue to love because I heard Allah's Apostle saying,
' Learn the recitation of the Qur'an from (any of these) four persons:
'Abdullah bin Masud, Salim the freed slave of Abu Hudhaifa, Ubai bin Kab,
and Muadh bin Jabal." I do not remember whether he mentioned Ubai first
or Muadh.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 104:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
Allah's Apostle neither talked in an insulting manner nor did he ever speak
evil intentionally. He used to say, "The most beloved to me amongst you is
the one who has the best character and manners." He added, " Learn the
Qur'an from (any of these) four persons. 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud, Salim the
freed slave of Abu Hudhaifa, Ubai bin Ka'b, and Mu'adh bin Jabal."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 105:
Narrated Alqama:
I went to Sham and was offering a two-Rak'at prayer; I said, "O Allah! Bless
me with a (pious) companion." Then I saw an old man coming towards me,
and when he came near I said, (to myself), "I hope Allah has given me my
request." The man asked (me), "Where are you from?" I replied, "I am from
the people of Kufa." He said, "Weren't there amongst you the Carrier of the
(Prophet's) shoes, Siwak and the ablution water container? Weren't there
amongst you the man who was given Allah's Refuge from the Satan? And
weren't there amongst you the man who used to keep the (Prophet's)
secrets which nobody else knew? How did Ibn Um 'Abd (i.e. 'Abdullah bin
Mas'ud) use to recite Surat-al-lail (the Night:92)?" I recited:-"By the Night as it envelops By the Day as it appears in brightness. And by
male and female." (92.1-3) On that, Abu Darda said, "By Allah, the Prophet
made me read the Verse in this way after listening to him, but these people
(of Sham) tried their best to let me say something different."
Volume 5, Book 57, Number 106:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid:
We asked Hudhaifa to tell us of a person resembling (to some extent) the
Prophet in good appearance and straight forward behavior so that we may
learn from him (good manners and acceptable conduct). Hudhaifa replied, "I
do not know anybody resembling the Prophet (to some extent) in
appearance and conduct more than Ibn Um 'Abd.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 107:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari:
My brother and I came from Yemen, and for some time we continued to
consider 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud as one of the members of the family of the
Prophet because we used to see him and his mother going in the house of
the Prophet very often.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 108:
Narrated Ibn Abu Mulaika:
Muawiya offered one Rak'a Witr prayer after the 'Isha prayer, and at that
time a freed slave of Ibn 'Abbas was present. He (i.e. the slave) went to Ibn
'Abbas (and told him that Muawiya offered one Rak'a Witr prayer). Ibn
Abbas said, "Leave him, for he was in the company of Allah's Apostle."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 109:
Narrated Ibn Abi Mulaika:
Somebody said to Ibn 'Abbas, "Can you speak to the chief of the believers
Muwaiya, as he does not pray except one Rak'a as Witr?" Ibn 'Abbas replied,
"He is a Faqih (i.e. a learned man who can give religious verdicts) ."
Volume 5, Book 57, Number 110:
Narrated Humran bin Abbas:
Muawiya said (to the people), "You offer a prayer which we, who were the
companions of the Prophet never saw the Prophet offering, and he forbade
its offering," i.e. the two Rakat after the compulsory 'Asr prayer.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 111:
Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:
Allah's Apostle said, "Fatima is a part of me, and whoever makes her angry,
makes me angry."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 112:
Narrated Abu Salama:
'Aisha said, "Once Allah's Apostle said (to me), 'O Aish ('Aisha)! This is
Gabriel greeting you.' I said, 'Peace and Allah's Mercy and Blessings be on
him, you see what I don't see' " She was addressing Allah 's Apostle.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 113:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari:
Allah's Apostle said, "Many amongst men attained perfection but amongst
women none attained the perfection except Mary, the daughter of Imran
and Asiya, the wife of Pharaoh. And the superiority of 'Aisha to other
women is like the superiority of Tharid (i.e. an Arabic dish) to other meals."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 114:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "The superiority of 'Aisha over other women is like the
superiority of Tharid to other meals."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 115:
Narrated Al-Qasim bin Muhammad:
Once 'Aisha became sick and Ibn 'Abbas went to see her and said, "O
mother of the believers! You are leaving for truthful fore-runners i.e. for
Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr.

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 116:
Narrated Abu Wail:
When 'Ali sent 'Ammar and Al-Hasan to (the people of) Kufa to urge them to
fight, 'Ammar addressed them saying, "I know that she (i.e. 'Aisha) is the
wife of the Prophet in this world and in the Hereafter (world to come), but
Allah has put you to test, whether you will follow Him (i.e. Allah) or her."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 117:
Narrated 'Aisha:
That she borrowed a necklace from Asma' and it was lost. Allah's Apostle
sent some of his companions to look for it. During their journey the time of
prayer was due and they prayed without ablution. When they returned to
the Prophet they complained about it. So the Divine Verse of Tayammum
was revealed. Usaid bin Hudair said (to 'Aisha), "May Allah reward you
handsomely. By Allah, whenever you have a difficulty, Allah took you out of
it and brought with it, a Blessing for the Muslims."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 118:
Narrated Hisham's father
When Allah's Apostle was in his fatal illness, he started visiting his wives and
saying, "Where will I be tomorrow?" He was anxious to be in 'Aisha's home.
'Aisha said, "So when it was my day, the Prophet became silent (no longer
asked the question)."

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 119:
Narrated Hisham's father:
The people used to send presents to the Prophet on the day of 'Aisha's turn.
'Aisha said, "My companions (i.e. the other wives of the Prophet) gathered
in the house of Um Salama and said, "0 Um Salama! By Allah, the people
choose to send presents on the day of 'Aisha's turn and we too, love the
good (i.e. presents etc.) as 'Aisha does. You should tell Allah's Apostle to tell
the people to send their presents to him wherever he may be, or wherever
his turn may be." Um Salama said that to the Prophet and he turned away
from her, and when the Prophet returned to her (i.e. Um Salama), she
repeated the same, and the Prophet again turned away, and when she told
him the same for the third time, the Prophet said, "O Um Salama! Don't
trouble me by harming 'Aisha, for by Allah, the Divine Inspiration never came
to me while I was under the blanket of any woman amongst you except
her."
BOOK 58. MERITS OF THE HELPERS IN MADINAH (ANSAAR) (120-284)
Volume 5, Book 58, Number 120:
Narrated Ghailan bin Jarir:
I asked Anas, "Tell me about the name 'Al-Ansar.; Did you call yourselves by
it or did Allah call you by it?" He said, "Allah called us by it." We used to visit
Anas (at Basra) and he used to narrate to us the virtues and deeds of the
Ansar, and he used to address me or a person from the tribe of Al-Azd and
say, "Your tribe did so-and-so on such-and-such a day."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 121:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The day of Bu'ath (i.e. Day of fighting between the two tribes of the Ansar,
the Aus and Khazraj) was brought about by Allah for the good of His Apostle
so that when Allah's Apostle reached (Medina), the tribes of Medina had
already divided and their chiefs had been killed and wounded. So Allah had
brought about the battle for the good of H is Apostle in order that they (i.e.
the Ansar) might embrace Islam.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 122:
Narrated Anas:
On the day of the Conquest of Mecca, when the Prophet had given (from
the booty) the Quraish, the Ansar said, "By Allah, this is indeed very strange:
While our swords are still dribbling with the blood of Quraish, our war booty
are distributed amongst them." When this news reached the Prophet he
called the Ansar and said, "What is this news that has reached me from
you?" They used not to tell lies, so they replied, "What has reached you is
true." He said, "Doesn't it please you that the people take the booty to their
homes and you take Allah's Apostle to your homes? If the Ansar took their
way through a valley or a mountain pass, I would take the Ansar's valley or a
mountain pass."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 123:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet or Abul-Qasim said, "If the Ansar took their way through a
valley or a mountain pass, I would take Ansar's valley. And but for the
migration, I would have been one of the Ansar." Abu Huraira used to say,
"The Prophet is not unjust (by saying so). May my parents be sacrificed for
him, for the Ansar sheltered and helped him," or said a similar sentence.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 124:
Narrated Sa'd's father:
When the emigrants reached Medina. Allah's Apostle established the bond
of fraternity between 'Abdur-Rahman and Sad bin Ar-Rabi. Sad said to
'Abdur-Rahman, "I am the richest of all the Ansar, so I want to divide my
property (between us), and I have two wives, so see which of the two you
like and tell me, so that I may divorce her, and when she finishes her
prescribed period (i.e. 'Idda) of divorce, then marry her." Abdur-Rahman
said, "May Allah bless your family and property for you; where is your
market?" So they showed him the Qainuqa' market. (He went there and)
returned with a profit in the form of dried yogurt and butter. He continued
going (to the market) till one day he came, bearing the traces of yellow
scent. The Prophet asked, "What is this (scent)?" He replied, "I got married."
The Prophet asked, "How much Mahr did you give her?" He replied, "I gave
her a date-stone of gold or a gold piece equal to the weight of a datestone." (The narrator, Ibrahim, is in doubt as to which is correct.)

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 125:
Narrated Anas:
When 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf came to us, Allah's Apostle made a bond of
fraternity between him and Sad bin Ar-Rabi' who was a rich man, Sad said,
"The Ansar know that I am the richest of all of them, so I will divide my
property into two parts between me and you, and I have two wives; see
which of the two you like so that I may divorce her and you can marry her
after she becomes lawful to you by her passing the prescribed period (i.e.
'Idda) of divorce. 'Abdur Rahman said, "May Allah bless you your family (i.e.
wives) for you." (But 'Abdur-Rahman went to the market) and did not return
on that day except with some gain of dried yogurt and butter. He went on
trading just a few days till he came to Allah's Apostle bearing the traces of
yellow scent over his clothes. Allah's Apostle asked him, "What is this
scent?" He replied, "I have married a woman from the Ansar." Allah's
Apostle asked, "How much Mahr have you given?" He said, "A date-stone
weight of gold or a golden date-stone." The Prophet said, "Arrange a
marriage banquet even with a sheep."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 126:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Ansar said (to the Prophet ), "Please divide the date-palm trees
between us and them (i.e. emigrants)." The Prophet said, "No." The Ansar
said, "Let them (i.e. the emigrants) do the labor for us in the gardens and
share the date-fruits with us." The emigrants said, "We accepted this."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 127:
Narrated Al-Bara:
I heard the Prophet saying (or the Prophet said), "None loves the Ansar but
a believer, and none hates them but a hypocrite. So Allah will love him who
loves them, and He will hate him who hates them."
Volume 5, Book 58, Number 128:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "The sign of Belief is to love the Ansar, and the sign of
hypocrisy is to hate the Ansar."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 129:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet saw the women and children (of the Ansar) coming forward.
(The sub-narrator said, "I think that Anas said, 'They were returning from a
wedding party.") The Prophet stood up and said thrice, "By Allah! You are
from the most beloved people to me."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 130:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Once an Ansari woman, accompanied by a son of hers, came to Allah's
Apostle. Allah's Apostle spoke to her and said twice, "By Him in Whose Hand
my life is, you are the most beloved people to me."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 131:
Narrated Zaid bin Al-Arqam:
The Annwar said, "O Allah's Apostle! Every prophet has his own followers
and we have followed you. So will you invoke Allah to let our followers be
considered from us (as Ansar too)?" So he invoked Allah accordingly.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 132:
Narrated Abu Hamza:
(A man from the Ansar) The Ansar said, "Every nation has followers and (O
Prophet) we have followed you, so invoke Allah to let our followers be
considered from us (as Ansar like ourselves)." So the Prophet said, "O Allah!
Let their followers be considered as Ansar like themselves."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 133:
Narrated Abu Usaid:
The Prophet said, "The best of the Ansar's families (homes) are those of
Banu An-Najjar and then (those of) Banu 'Abdul Ash-hal, then (those of)
Banu Al-Harith bin Al-Khazraj and then (those of) Banu Sa'ida; nevertheless,
there is good in all the families (houses) of the Ansar." On this, Sad (bin
Ubada) said, "I see that the Prophet has preferred some people to us."
Somebody said (to him), "No, but he has given you superiority to many."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 134:
Narrated Abu Usaid:
That he heard the Prophet saying, "The best of the Ansar, or the best of the
Ansar families (homes) are Banu An-Najjar, Bani 'Abdul Ash-hal, Banu AlHarith and Banu Sai'da."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 135:
Narrated Abu Humaid:
The Prophet said, "The best of the Ansar families (homes) are the families
(homes) of Banu An-Najjar, and then that of Banu 'Abdul Ash-hal, and then
that of Banu Al-Harith, and then that of Banu Saida; and there is good in all
the families (homes) of the Ansar." Sad bin 'Ubada followed us and said, "O
Abu Usaid ! Don't you see that the Prophet compared the Ansar and made
us the last of them in superiority?
Then Sad met the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! In comparing the
Ansar's families (homes) as to the degree of superiority, you have made us
the last of them." Allah's Apostle replied, "Isn't it sufficient that you are
regarded amongst the best?"

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 136:
Narrated Usaid bin Hudair:
A man from the Ansar said, "O Allah's Apostle! Will you appoint me as you
have appointed so-and-so?" The Prophet said, "After me you will see others
given preference to you; so be patient till you meet me at the Tank (i.e. Lake
of Kauthar). (on the Day of Resurrection)."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 137:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said to the Ansar, "After me you will see others given
preference to you; so be patient till you meet me, and your promised place
(of meeting) will be the Tank (i.e. Lake of Kauthar)."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 138:
Narrated Yahya bin Said:
That he heard Anas bin Malik when he went with him to Al-Walid, saying,
"Once the Prophet called the Ansar in order to give them the territory of
Bahrain they said, 'No, unless you give to our emigrant brethren a similar
share.' On that he said 'If you do not agree to it, then be patient till you
meet me, for after me others will be given preference to you."'

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 139:
Narrated Anas bin Malik
Allah's Apostle said, "There is no life except the life of the Hereafter; so, O
Allah! Improve the state of the Ansar and the Muhajirun." And Anas added
that the Prophet also said, "O Allah! Forgive the Ansar."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 140:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
On the day of the battle of the Trench (i.e. Ghazwat-ul-Khandaq) the Ansar
used to say, "We are those who have given the pledge of allegiance to
Muhammad for Jihad (i.e. holy fighting) as long as we live." The Prophet ,
replied to them, "O Allah! There is no life except the life of the Hereafter; so
please honor the Ansar and the Emigrants."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 141:
Narrated Sahl:
Allah's Apostle came to us while we were digging the trench and carrying
out the earth on our backs. Allah's Apostle then said, "O Allah ! There is no
life except the life of the Hereafter, so please forgive the Emigrants and the
Ansar."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 142:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man came to the Prophet. The Prophet sent a messenger to his wives (to
bring something for that man to eat) but they said that they had nothing
except water. Then Allah's Apostle said, "Who will take this (person) or
entertain him as a guest?" An Ansar man said, "I." So he took him to his wife
and said to her, "Entertain generously the guest of Allah's Apostle " She
said, "We have got nothing except the meals of my children." He said,
"Prepare your meal, light your lamp and let your children sleep if they ask
for supper." So she prepared her meal, lighted her lamp and made her
children sleep, and then stood up pretending to mend her lamp, but she put
it off. Then both of them pretended to be eating, but they really went to
bed hungry. In the morning the Ansari went to Allah's Apostle who said,
"Tonight Allah laughed or wondered at your action." Then Allah revealed:
"But give them (emigrants) preference over themselves even though they
were in need of that And whosoever is saved from the covetousness Such
are they who will be successful." (59.9)

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 143:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Abu Bakr and Al-'Abbas passed by one of the gatherings of the Ansar who
were weeping then. He (i.e. Abu Bakr or Al-'Abbas) asked, "Why are you
weeping?" They replied, "We are weeping because we remember the
gathering of the Prophet with us." So Abu Bakr went to the Prophet and
told him of that. The Prophet came out, tying his head with a piece of the
hem of a sheet. He ascended the pulpit which he never ascended after that
day. He glorified and praised Allah and then said, "I request you to take care
of the Ansar as they are my near companions to whom I confided my private
secrets. They have fulfilled their obligations and rights which were enjoined
on them but there remains what is for them. So, accept the good of the
good-doers amongst them and excuse the wrongdoers amongst them."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 144:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle (in his fatal illness) came out wrapped in a sheet covering his
shoulders and his head was tied with an oily tape of cloth till he sat on the
pulpit, and after praising and glorifying Allah, he said, "Then-after, O people!
The people will go on increasing, but the Ansar will go on decreasing till they
become just like salt in a meal. So whoever amongst you will be the ruler
and have the power to harm or benefit others, should accept the good of
the good-doers amongst them and excuse the wrong-doers amongst them."
Volume 5, Book 58, Number 145:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "The Ansar are my near companions to whom I confided
my private secrets, People will go on increasing but the Ansar will go on
decreasing; so accept the good of the good-doers amongst them and
excuse the wrong-doers amongst them. "

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 146:
Narrated Al-Bara:
A silken cloth was given as a present to the Prophet . His companions
started touching it and admiring its softness. The Prophet said, "Are you
admiring its softness? The handkerchiefs of Sad bin Muadh (in Paradise) are
better and softer than it."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 147:
Narrated Jabir:
I heard the Prophet saying, "The Throne (of Allah) shook at the death of Sad
bin Muadh." Through another group of narrators, Jabir added, "I heard the
Prophet : saying, 'The Throne of the Beneficent shook because of the death
of Sad bin Muadh."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 148:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Some people (i.e. the Jews of Bani bin Quraiza) agreed to accept the verdict
of Sad bin Muadh so the Prophet sent for him (i.e. Sad bin Muadh). He came
riding a donkey, and when he approached the Mosque, the Prophet said,
"Get up for the best amongst you." or said, "Get up for your chief." Then th
Prophet said, "O Sad! These people have agreed to accept your verdict." Sad
said, "I judge that their warriors should be killed and their children and
women should be taken as captives." The Prophet said, "You have given a
judgment similar to Allah's Judgment (or the King's judgment)."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 149:
Narrated Anas:
Two men left the Prophet on a very dark night. Suddenly a light came in
front of them, and when they separated, the light also separated along with
them.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 150:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Learn the recitation of Qur'an from four
persons: Ibn Mas'ud, Salim, the freed slave of Abu Hudhaifa, Ubai and
Muadh bin Jabal."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 151:
Narrated the virtue of Sad bin Ubada:
Aisha said, "Before that, he (i.e. Sad) was a pious man."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 152:
Narrated Abu Usaid:
Allah's Apostle said, "The best of the Ansar's houses are those of Bani AnNajjar, then those of Bani 'Abdul Ash-hal, then those of Bani Al-Harith bin AlKhazraj, then those of Bani Saida; but there is goodness in all the houses of
the Ansar." Sad bin Ubada who was one of those who embraced Islam early,
said, "I see that Allah's Apostle is giving others superiority above us." Some
people said to him, "But he has given you superiority above many other
people."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 153:
Narrated Masruq:
'Abdullah bin Masud was mentioned before Abdullah bin 'Amr who said,
"That is a man I still love, as I heard the Prophet saying 'Learn the recitation
of Quran from four from 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud --he started with him--Salim,
the freed slave of Abu Hudaifa, Mu'adh bin Jabal and Ubai bin Ka'b."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 154:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said to Ubai, "Allah has ordered me to recite to you: 'Those
who disbelieve (Surat-al-Bayina 98).' " Ubai said, "Has He mentioned my
name?" The Prophet said, "Yes." On hearing this, Ubai started weeping.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 155:
Narrated Qatada:
Anas said, "The Quran was collected in the lifetime of the Prophet by four
(men), all of whom were from the Ansar: Ubai, Muadh bin Jabal, Abu Zaid
and Zaid bin Thabit." I asked Anas, "Who is Abu Zaid?" He said, "One of my
uncles."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 156:
Narrated Anas:
On the day of the battle of Uhud, the people ran away, leaving the Prophet ,
but Abu- Talha was shielding the Prophet with his shield in front of him. Abu
Talha was a strong, experienced archer who used to keep his arrow bow
strong and well stretched. On that day he broke two or three arrow bows. If
any man passed by carrying a quiver full of arrows, the Prophet would say to
him, "Empty it in front of Abu Talha." When the Prophet stated looking at
the enemy by raising his head, Abu Talha said, "O Allah's Prophet! Let my
parents be sacrificed for your sake! Please don't raise your head and make it
visible, lest an arrow of the enemy should hit you. Let my neck and chest be
wounded instead of yours." (On that day) I saw 'Aisha, the daughter of Abu
Bakr and Um Sulaim both lifting their dresses up so that I was able to see
the ornaments of their legs, and they were carrying the water skins of their
arms to pour the water into the mouths of the thirsty people and then go
back and fill them and come to pour the water into the mouths of the
people again. (On that day) Abu Talha's sword fell from his hand twice or
thrice.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 157:
Narrated Sad bin Abi Waqqas:
I have never heard the Prophet saying about anybody walking on the earth
that he is from the people of Paradise except 'Abdullah bin Salam. The
following Verse was revealed concerning him: "And a witness from the
children of Israel testifies that this Qur'an is true" (46.10)

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 158:
Narrated Qais bin Ubad:
While I was sitting in the Mosque of Medina, there entered a man (Abdullah
bin Salam) with signs of solemnity over his face. The people said, "He is one
of the people of Paradise." He prayed two light Rakat and then left. I
followed him and said, "When you entered the Mosque, the people said, 'He
is one of the people of Paradise.' " He said, "By Allah, one ought not say
what he does not know; and I will tell you why. In the lifetime of the Prophet
I had a dream which I narrated to him. I saw as if I were in a garden." He
then described its extension and greenery. He added: In its center there was
an iron pillar whose lower end was fixed in the earth and the upper end was
in the sky, and at its upper end there was a (ring-shaped) hand-hold. I was
told to climb it. I said, "I can't." "Then a servant came to me and lifted my
clothes from behind and I climbed till I reached the top (of the pillar). Then I
got hold of the hand-hold, and I was told to hold it tightly, then I woke up
and (the effect of) the hand-hold was in my hand. I narrated al I that to the
Prophet who said, 'The garden is Islam, and the hand-hold is the Most Truthworthy Hand-Hold. So you will remain as a Muslim till you die." The narrator
added: "The man was 'Abdullah bin Salam."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 159:
Narrated Abu Burda:
When I came to Medina. I met Abdullah bin Salam. He said, "Will you come
to me so that I may serve you with Sawiq (i.e. powdered barley) and dates,
and let you enter a (blessed) house that in which the Prophet entered?"
Then he added, "You are In a country where the practice of Riba (i.e. usury)
is prevalent; so if somebody owe you something and he sends you a present
of a load of chopped straw or a load of barley or a load of provender then
do not take it, as it is Riba."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 160:
Narrated Jarir bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle has never refused to admit me since I embraced Islam, and
whenever he saw me, he would smile. (In another narration) Jarir bin
'Abdullah narrated: There was a house called Dhul-Khalasa in the Pre-lslamic
Period and it was also called Al-Ka'ba Al-Yamaniya or Al-Ka'ba Ash-Shamiya.
Allah's Apostle said to me, "Will you relieve me from Dhul-Khalasa?" So I left
for it with 150 cavalrymen from the tribe of Ahmas and then we destroyed it
and killed whoever we found there. Then we came to the Prophet and
informed him about it. He invoked good upon us and upon the tribe of
Ahmas.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 161:
Narrated 'Aisha:
On the day of the battle of Uhud the pagans were defeated completely.
Then Satan shouted loudly, "O Allah's slaves! Beware the ones behind you!"
So the front files attacked the back ones. Then Hudhaifa looked and saw his
father, and said loudly, "O Allah's slaves! My father! My father!" By Allah,
they did not stop till they killed him (i.e. Hudaifa's father). Hudhaifa said,
"May Allah forgive you!" The sub-narrator said, "By Allah, because of what
Hudhaifa said, he remained in a good state till he met Allah (i.e. died)."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 162:
Narrated 'Ali:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying (as below).

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 163:
Narrated 'Ali:
The Prophet said, "The best of the world's women is Mary (at her lifetime),
and the best of the world's women is Khadija (at her lifetime)."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 164:
Narrated 'Aisha: 
I did not feel jealous of any of the wives of the Prophet as much as I
did of Khadija (although) she died before he married me, for I often heard
him mentioning her, and Allah had told him to give her the good tidings that
she would have a palace of Qasab (i.e. pipes of precious stones and pearls in
Paradise), and whenever he slaughtered a sheep, he would send her
women-friends a good share of it.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 165:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I did not feel jealous of any woman as much as I did of Khadija because
Allah's Apostle used to mention her very often. He married me after three
years of her death, and his Lord (or Gabriel) ordered him to give her the
good news of having a palace of Qasab in Paradise.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 166:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I did not feel jealous of any of the wives of the Prophet as much as I did of
Khadija though I did not see her, but the Prophet used to mention her very
often, and when ever he slaughtered a sheep, he would cut its parts and
send them to the women friends of Khadija. When I sometimes said to him,
"(You treat Khadija in such a way) as if there is no woman on earth except
Khadija," he would say, "Khadija was such-and-such, and from her I had
children."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 167:
Narrated Ismail:
I asked 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa, "Did the Prophet give glad tidings to
Khadija?" He said, "Yes, of a palace of Qasab (in Paradise) where there will
be neither any noise nor any fatigue."
Volume 5, Book 58, Number 168:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Gabriel came to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! This is Khadija
coming to you with a dish having meat soup (or some food or drink). When
she reaches you, greet her on behalf of her Lord (i.e. Allah) and on my
behalf, and give her the glad tidings of having a Qasab palace in Paradise
wherein there will be neither any noise nor any fatigue (trouble) . "
Narrated 'Aisha: Once Hala bint Khuwailid, Khadija's sister, asked the
permission of the Prophet to enter. On that, the Prophet remembered the
way Khadija used to ask permission, and that upset him. He said, "O Allah!
Hala!" So I became jealous and said, "What makes you remember an old
woman amongst the old women of Quraish an old woman (with a teethless
mouth) of red gums who died long ago, and in whose place Allah has given
you somebody better than her?"

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 169:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
The Prophet met Zaid bin 'Amr bin Nufail in the bottom of (the valley of)
Baldah before any Divine Inspiration came to the Prophet. A meal was
presented to the Prophet but he refused to eat from it. (Then it was
presented to Zaid) who said, "I do not eat anything which you slaughter in
the name of your stone idols. I eat none but those things on which Allah's
Name has been mentioned at the time of slaughtering." Zaid bin 'Amr used
to criticize the way Quraish used to slaughter their animals, and used to say,
"Allah has created the sheep and He has sent the water for it from the sky,
and He has grown the grass for it from the earth; yet you slaughter it in
other than the Name of Allah. He used to say so, for he rejected that
practice and considered it as something abominable.
Narrated Ibn 'Umar: Zaid bin 'Amr bin Nufail went to Sham, inquiring about a
true religion to follow. He met a Jewish religious scholar and asked him
about their religion. He said, "I intend to embrace your religion, so tell me
some thing about it." The Jew said, "You will not embrace our religion
unless you receive your share of Allah's Anger." Zaid said, "'I do not run
except from Allah's Anger, and I will never bear a bit of it if I have the power
to avoid it. Can you tell me of some other religion?" He said, "I do not know
any other religion except the Hanif." Zaid enquired, "What is Hanif?" He said,
"Hanif is the religion of (the prophet) Abraham who was neither a Jew nor a
Christian, and he used to worship None but Allah (Alone)" Then Zaid went
out and met a Christian religious scholar and told him the same as before.
The Christian said, "You will not embrace our religion unless you get a share
of Allah's Curse." Zaid replied, "I do not run except from Allah's Curse, and I
will never bear any of Allah's Curse and His Anger if I have the power to
avoid them. Will you tell me of some other religion?" He replied, "I do not
know any other religion except Hanif." Zaid enquired, "What is Hanif?" He
replied, Hanif is the religion of (the prophet) Abraham who was neither a
Jew nor a Christian and he used to worship None but Allah (Alone)" When
Zaid heard their Statement about (the religion of) Abraham, he left that
place, and when he came out, he raised both his hands and said, "O Allah! I
make You my Witness that I am on the religion of Abraham."
Narrated Asma bint Abi Bakr: I saw Zaid bin Amr bin Nufail standing with his
back against the Ka'ba and saying, "O people of Quraish! By Allah, none
amongst you is on the religion of Abraham except me." He used to preserve
the lives of little girls: If somebody wanted to kill his daughter he would say
to him, "Do not kill her for I will feed her on your behalf." So he would take
her, and when she grew up nicely, he would say to her father, "Now if you
want her, I will give her to you, and if you wish, I will feed her on your
behalf."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 170:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
When the Ka'ba was rebuilt, the Prophet and 'Abbas went to carry stones.
'Abbas said to the Prophet "(Take off and) put your waist sheet over your
neck so that the stones may not hurt you." (But as soon as he took off his
waist sheet) he fell unconscious on the ground with both his eyes towards
the sky. When he came to his senses, he said, "My waist sheet! My waist
sheet!" Then he tied his waist sheet (round his waist).

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 171:
Narrated 'Amr bin Dinar and 'Ubaidullah bin Abi Yazid:
In the lifetime of the Prophet there was no wall around the Ka'ba and the
people used to pray around the Ka'ba till 'Umar became the Caliph and he
built the wall around it. 'Ubaidullah further said, "Its wall was low, so Ibn AzZubair built it."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 172:
Narrated 'Aisha:
'Ashura' (i.e. the tenth of Muharram) was a day on which the tribe of
Quraish used to fast in the pre-lslamic period of ignorance. The Prophet also
used to fast on this day. So when he migrated to Medina, he fasted on it and
ordered (the Muslims) to fast on it. When the fasting of Ramadan was
enjoined, it became optional for the people to fast or not to fast on the day
of Ashura.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 173:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The people used to consider the performance of 'Umra in the months of Hajj
an evil deed on the earth, and they used to call the month of Muharram as
Safar and used to say, "When (the wounds over) the backs (of the camels)
have healed and the foot-marks (of the camels) have vanished (after coming
from Hajj), then 'Umra becomes legal for the one who wants to perform
'Umra." Allah's Apostle and his companions reached Mecca assuming Ihram
for Hajj on the fourth of Dhul-Hijja. The Prophet ordered his companions to
perform 'Umra (with that lhram instead of Hajj). They asked, "O Allah's
Apostle! What kind of finishing of Ihram?" The Prophet said, "Finish the
Ihram completely.'

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 174:
Narrated Sa'id bin Al-Musaiyab's grand-father:
In the pre-lslamic period of ignorance a flood of rain came and filled the
valley in between the two mountains (around the Ka'ba)......

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 175:
Narrated Qais bin Abi Hazim:
Abu Bakr went to a lady from the Ahmas tribe called Zainab bint Al-Muhajir
and found that she refused to speak. He asked, "Why does she not speak."
The people said, "She has intended to perform Hajj without speaking." He
said to her, "Speak, for it is illegal not to speak, as it is an action of the preislamic period of ignorance. So she spoke and said, "Who are you?" He said,
"A man from the Emigrants." She asked, "Which Emigrants?" He replied,
"From Quraish." She asked, "From what branch of Quraish are you?" He
said, "You ask too many questions; I am Abu Bakr." She said, "How long
shall we enjoy this good order (i.e. Islamic religion) which Allah has brought
after the period of ignorance?" He said, "You will enjoy it as long as your
Imams keep on abiding by its rules and regulations." She asked, "What are
the Imams?" He said, "Were there not heads and chiefs of your nation who
used to order the people and they used to obey them?" She said, "Yes." He
said, "So they (i.e. the Imams) are those whom I meant."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 176:
Narrated 'Aisha:
A black lady slave of some of the 'Arabs embraced Islam and she had a hut in
the mosque. She used to visit us and talk to us, and when she finished her
talk, she used to say: "The day of the scarf was one of our Lord's wonders:
Verily! He has delivered me from the land of Kufr." When she said the above
verse many times, I (i.e. 'Aisha) asked her, "What was the day of the scarf?"
She replied, "Once the daughter of some of my masters went out and she
was wearing a leather scarf (round her neck) and the leather scarf fell from
her and a kite descended and picked it up, mistaking it for a piece of meat.
They (i.e. my masters) accused me of stealing it and they tortured me to
such an extent that they even looked for it in my private parts. So, while
they all were around me, and I was in my great distress, suddenly the kite
came over our heads and threw the scarf, and they took it. I said to them
'This is what you accused me of stealing, though I was innocent."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 177:
Narrated 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "If anybody has to take an oath, he should swear only by
Allah." The people of Quraish used to swear by their fathers, but the
Prophet said, "Do not swear by your fathers. "

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 178:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Al-Qasim:
Al-Qasim used to walk in front of the funeral procession. He used not to get
up for the funeral procession (in case it passed by him). And he narrated
from 'Aisha that she said, "The people of the pre-lslamic period of ignorance
used to stand up for the funeral procession. When they saw it they used to
say twice: 'You were noble in your family. What are you now?"

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 179:
Narrated 'Umar:
The pagans used not to leave Jam' (i.e. Muzdalifa) till the sun had risen on
Thabir mountain. The Prophet contradicted them by leaving (Muzdalifa)
before the sun rose.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 180:
Narrated Husain:
That Ikrima said, "Kasan Dihaqa means glass full (of something) followed
successively with other full glasses." Ibn 'Abbas said, "In the pre-lslamic
period of ignorance I heard my father saying, "Provide us with Kasan
Dihaqa."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 181:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The most true words said by a poet was the words of
Labid." He said, Verily, Everything except Allah is perishable and Umaiya bin
As-Salt was about to be a Muslim (but he did not embrace Islam).

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 182:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Abu Bakr had a slave who used to give him some of his earnings. Abu Bakr
used to eat from it. One day he brought something and Abu Bakr ate from it.
The slave said to him, "Do you know what this is?" Abu Bakr then enquired,
"What is it?" The slave said, "Once, in the pre-Islamic period of ignorance I
foretold somebody's future though I did not know this knowledge of
foretelling but I, cheated him, and when he met me, he gave me something
for that service, and that is what you have eaten from." Then Abu Bakr put
his hand in his mouth and vomited whatever was present in his stomach.
Volume 5, Book 58, Number 183:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
In the pre-lslamic period of ignorance the people used to bargain with the
meat of camels on the principle of Habal-al-Habala which meant the sale of a
she-camel that would be born by a she-camel that had not yet been born.
The Prophet forbade them such a transaction.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 184:
Narrated Ghailan bin Jarir:
We used to visit Anas bin Malik and he used to talk to us about the Ansar,
and used to say to me: "Your people did so-and-so on such-and-such a day,
and your people did so-and-so on such-and-such a day."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 185:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The first event of Qasama in the pre-lslamic period of ignorance was
practiced by us (i.e. Banu Hashim). A man from Banu Hashim was employed
by a Quraishi man from another branch-family. The (Hashimi) laborer set out
with the Quraishi driving his camels. There passed by him another man from
Banu Hashim. The leather rope of the latter's bag had broken so he said to
the laborer, "Will you help me by giving me a rope in order to tie the handle
of my bag lest the camels should run away from me?" The laborer gave him
a rope and the latter tied his bag with it. When the caravan halted, all the
camels' legs were tied with their fetters except one camel. The employer
asked the laborer, "Why, from among all the camels has this camel not been
fettered?" He replied, "There is no fetter for it." The Quraishi asked, "Where
is its fetter?" and hit the laborer with a stick that caused his death (later on
Just before his death) a man from Yemen passed by him. The laborer asked
(him), "Will you go for the pilgrimage?" He replied, "I do not think I will
attend it, but perhaps I will attend it." The (Hashimi) laborer said, "Will you
please convey a message for me once in your life?" The other man said,
"yes." The laborer wrote: 'When you attend the pilgrimage, call the family of
Quraish, and if they respond to you, call the family of Banu Hashim, and if
they respond to you, ask about Abu Talib and tell him that so-and-so has
killed me for a fetter." Then the laborer expired. When the employer
reached (Mecca), Abu Talib visited him and asked, "What has happened to
our companion?" He said, "He became ill and I looked after him nicely (but
he died) and I buried him." Then Abu Talib said, "The deceased deserved this
from you." After some time, the messenger whom the laborer has asked to
convey the message, reached during the pilgrimage season. He called, "O
the family of Quraish!" The people replied, "This is Quraish." Then he called,
"O the family of Banu Hashim!" Again the people replied, "This is Banu
Hashim." He asked, "Who is Abu Talib?" The people replied, "This is Abu
Talib." He said, "'So-and-so has asked me to convey a message to you that
so-and-so has killed him for a fetter (of a camel)." Then Abu Talib went to
the (Quraishi) killer and said to him, "Choose one of three alternatives: (i) If
you wish, give us one-hundred camels because you have murdered our
companion, (ii) or if you wish, fifty of your men should take an oath that you
have not murdered our companion, and if you do not accept this, (iii) we will
kill you in Qisas." The killer went to his people and they said, "We will take
an oath." Then a woman from Banu Hashim who was married to one of
them (i.e.the Quraishis) and had given birth to a child from him, came to Abu
Talib and said, "O Abu Talib! I wish that my son from among the fifty men,
should be excused from this oath, and that he should not take the oath
where the oath-taking is carried on." Abu Talib excused him. Then another
man from them came (to Abu Talib) and said, "O Abu Talib! You want fifty
persons to take an oath instead of giving a hundred camels, and that means
each man has to give two camels (in case he does not take an oath). So
there are two camels I would like you to accept from me and excuse me
from taking an oath where the oaths are taken. Abu Talib accepted them
from him. Then 48 men came and took the oath. Ibn 'Abbas further said:) By
Him in Whose Hand my life is, before the end of that year, none of those 48
persons remained alive.
Volume 5, Book 58, Number 186:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah caused the day of Buath to take place before Allah's Apostle was sent
(as an Apostle) so that when Allah's Apostle reached Medina, those people
had already divided (in different groups) and their chiefs had been killed or
wounded. So Allah made that day precede Allah's Apostle so that they (i.e.
the Ansar) might embrace Islam.
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: To run along the valley between two green pillars of
Safa and Marwa (mountains) was not Sunna, but the people in the preislamic period of ignorance used to run along it, and used to say: "We do not
cross this rain stream except running strongly. "

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 187:
Narrated Abu As-Safar:
I heard Ibn 'Abbas saying, "O people! Listen to what I say to you, and let me
hear whatever you say, and don't go (without understanding), and start
saying, 'Ibn 'Abbas said so-and-so, Ibn 'Abbas said so-and-so, Ibn 'Abbas said
so-and-so.' He who wants to perform the Tawaf around the Ka'ba should go
behind Al-Hijr (i.e. a portion of the Ka'ba left out unroofed) and do not call it
Al-Hatim, for in the pre-Islamic period of ignorance if any man took an oath,
he used to throw his whip, shoes or bow in it.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 188:
Narrated 'Amr bin Maimun:
During the pre-lslamic period of ignorance I saw a she-monkey surrounded
by a number of monkeys. They were all stoning it, because it had committed
illegal sexual intercourse. I too, stoned it along with them.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 189:
Narrated Sufyan:
'Ubaidullah said: "I heard Ibn 'Abbas saying, "Following are some traits of
the people of the pre-Islamic period of ignorance (i) to defame the ancestry
of other families, (ii) and to wail over the dead." 'Ubaidullah forgot the third
trait. Sufyan said, "They say it (i.e. the third trait) was to believe that rain
was caused by the influence of stars (i.e. if a special star appears it will
rain)."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 190:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle was inspired Divinely at the age of forty. Then he stayed in
Mecca for thirteen years, and then was ordered to migrate, and he migrated
to Medina and stayed there for ten years and then died.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 191:
Narrated Khabbaba:
I came to the Prophet while he was leaning against his sheet cloak in the
shade of the Ka'ba. We were suffering greatly from the pagans in those
days. i said (to him). "Will you invoke Allah (to help us)?" He sat down with a
red face and said, "(A believer among) those who were before you used to
be combed with iron combs so that nothing of his flesh or nerves would
remain on his bones; yet that would never make him desert his religion. A
saw might be put over the parting of his head which would be split into two
parts, yet all that would never make him abandon his religion. Allah will
surely complete this religion (i.e. Islam) so that a traveler from Sana to
Hadra-maut will not be afraid of anybody except Allah." (The sub-narrator,
Baiyan added, "Or the wolf, lest it should harm his sheep.")

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 192:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet recited Surat An-Najam and prostrated, and there was nobody
who did not prostrate then except a man whom I saw taking a handful of
pebbles, lifting it, and prostrating on it. He then said, "This is sufficient for
me." No doubt I saw him killed as a disbeliever afterwards.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 193:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
While the Prophet was prostrating, surrounded by some of Quraish, 'Uqba
bin Abi Mu'ait brought the intestines (i.e. abdominal contents) of a camel
and put them over the back of the Prophet. The Prophet did not raise his
head, (till) Fatima, came and took it off his back and cursed the one who had
done the harm. The Prophet said, "O Allah! Destroy the chiefs of Quraish,
Abu Jahl bin Hisham, 'Utba bin Rabi'al, Shaba bin Rabi'a, Umaiya bin Khalaf
or Ubai bin Khalaf." (The sub-narrator Shu'ba, is not sure of the last name.) I
saw these people killed on the day of Badr battle and thrown in the well
except Umaiya or Ubai whose body parts were mutilated but he was not
thrown in the well.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 194:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
'AbdurRahman bin Abza said, "Ask Ibn 'Abbas about these two Qur'anic
Verses: 'Nor kill such life as Allah has made sacred, Except for just cause.'
(25.168) "And whoever kills a believer intentionally, his recompense is Hell.
(4.93)
So I asked Ibn 'Abbas who said, "When the Verse that is in Sura-al-Furqan
was revealed, the pagans of Mecca said, 'But we have slain such life as Allah
has made sacred, and we have invoked other gods along with Allah, and we
have also committed fornication.' So Allah revealed:-- 'Except those who
repent, believe, and do good-- (25.70)
So this Verse was concerned with those people. As for the Verse in Surat-anNisa (4-93), it means that if a man, after understanding Islam and its laws
and obligations, murders somebody, then his punishment is to dwell in the
(Hell) Fire forever." Then I mentioned this to Mujahid who said, "Except the
one who regrets (one's crime) . "

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 195:
Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair:
I asked Ibn Amr bin Al-As, "Tell me of the worst thing which the pagans did
to the Prophet." He said, "While the Prophet was praying in the Hijr of the
Ka'ba; 'Uqba bin Abi Mu'ait came and put his garment around the Prophet's
neck and throttled him violently. Abu Bakr came and caught him by his
shoulder and pushed him away from the Prophet and said, "Do you want to
kill a man just because he says, 'My Lord is Allah?' "

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 196:
Narrated 'Urwa:
As above (Hadith 195).

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 197:
Narrated 'Ammar bin Yasir:
I saw Allah's Apostle , and the only converts (to Islam) with him, were five
slaves, two women and Abu Bakr.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 198:
Narrated Abu Ishaq Saud bin Abi Waqqas:
None embraced Islam, except on the day I embraced it. And for seven days I
was one of the three persons who were Muslims (one-third of Islam).

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 199:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman:
"I asked Masruq, 'Who informed the Prophet about the Jinns at the night
when they heard the Qur'an?' He said, 'Your father 'Abdullah informed me
that a tree informed the Prophet about them.' "

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 200:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
That once he was in the, company of the Prophet carrying a water pot for
his ablution and for cleaning his private parts. While he was following him
carrying it(i.e. the pot), the Prophet said, "Who is this?" He said, "I am Abu
Huraira." The Prophet said, "Bring me stones in order to clean my private
parts, and do not bring any bones or animal dung." Abu Huraira went on
narrating: So I brought some stones, carrying them in the corner of my robe
till I put them by his side and went away. When he finished, I walked with
him and asked, "What about the bone and the animal dung?" He said, "They
are of the food of Jinns. The delegate of Jinns of (the city of) Nasibin came
to me--and how nice those Jinns were--and asked me for the remains of the
human food. I invoked Allah for them that they would never pass by a bone
or animal dung but find food on them."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 201:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
When Abu Dhar received the news of the Advent of the Prophet he said to
his brother, "Ride to this valley (of Mecca) and try to find out the truth of
the person who claims to be a prophet who is informed of the news of
Heaven. Listen to what he says and come back to me." So his brother set
out and came to the Prophet and listened to some of his talks, and returned
to Abu Dhar and said to him. "I have seen him enjoining virtuous behavior
and saying something that is not poetry." Abu Dhar said, "You have not
satisfied me as to what I wanted." He then took his journey-food and carried
a water-skin of his, containing some water till be reached Mecca. He went to
the Mosque and searched for the Prophet and though he did not know him,
he hated to ask anybody about him. When a part of the night had passed
away, 'Ali saw him and knew that he was a stranger. So when Abu Dhar saw
'Ali, he followed him, and none of them asked his companion about
anything, and when it was dawn, Abu Dhar took his journey food and his
water-skin to the Mosque and stayed there all the day long without being
perceived by the Prophet, and when it was evening, he came back to his
retiring place. 'Ali passed by him and said, "Has the man not known his
dwelling place yet?" So 'Ali awakened him and took him with him and none
of them spoke to the other about anything. When it was the third day. 'Ali
did the same and Abu Dhar stayed with him. Then 'Ali said "Will you tell me
what has brought you here?" Abu Dhar said, "If you give me a firm promise
that you will guide me, then I will tell you." 'Ali promised him, and he
informed 'Ali about the matter. 'Ali said, "It is true, and he is the Apostle of
Allah. Next morning when you get up, accompany me, and if I see any
danger for you, I will stop as if to pass water, but if I go on, follow me and
enter the place which I will enter." Abu Dhar did so, and followed 'Ali till he
entered the place of the Prophet, and Abu Dhar went in with him, Abu Dhar
listened to some of the Prophet's talks and embraced Islam on the spot. The
Prophet said to him, "Go back to your people and inform them (about it) till
you receive my order." Abu Dhar said, "By Him in Whose Hand my life is, I
will proclaim my conversion loudly amongst them (i.e. the pagans)." So he
went out, and when he reached the Mosque, he said as loudly as possible, "I
bear witness that None has the right to be worshipped except Allah, and
Muhammad is the Apostle of Allah." The People got up and beat him
painfully. Then Al-Abbas came and knelt over him ((to protect him) and said
(to the people), "Woe to you! Don't you know that this man belongs to the
tribe of Ghifar and your trade to Sha'm is through their way?" So he rescued
him from them. Abu Dhar again did the same the next day. They beat him
and took vengeance on him and again Al-Abbas knelt over him (to protect
him).

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 202:
Narrated Qais:
I heard Said bin Zaid bin 'Amr bin Nufail saying in the mosque of Al-Kufa. "By
Allah, I have seen myself tied and forced by 'Umar to leave Islam before
'Umar himself embraced Islam. And if the mountain of Uhud could move
from its place for the evil which you people have done to 'Uthman, then it
would have the right to move from its place."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 203:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mus'ud:
We have been powerful since 'Umar embraced Islam.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 204:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:
While 'Umar was at home in a state of fear, there came Al-'As bin Wail AsSahmi Abu 'Amr, wearing an embroidered cloak and a shirt having silk hems.
He was from the tribe of Bani Sahm who were our allies during the preIslamic period of ignorance. Al-'As said to 'Umar "What is wrong with you?"
He said, "Your people claim that they would kill me if I become a Muslim."
Al-'As said, "Nobody will harm you after I have given protection to you." So
Al-'As went out and met the people streaming in the whole valley. He said,
"Where are you going?" They said, "We want Ibn Al-Khattab who has
embraced Islam." Al-'As said, "There is no way for anybody to touch him."
So the people retreated.
Volume 5, Book 58, Number 205:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
When 'Umar embraced Islam, all The (disbelieving) people gathered around
his home and said, "'Umar has embraced Islam." At that time I was still a boy
and was on the roof of my house. There came a man wearing a cloak of
Dibaj (i.e. a kind of silk), and said, "Umar has embraced Islam. Nobody can
harm him for I am his protector." I then saw the people going away from
'Umar and asked who the man was, and they said, "Al-'As bin Wail."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 206:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
I never heard 'Umar saying about something that he thought it would be soand-so, but he was quite right. Once, while 'Umar was sitting, a handsome
man passed by him, 'Umar said, "If I am not wrong, this person is still on his
religion of the pre-lslamic period of ignorance or he was their foreteller. Call
the man to me." When the man was called to him, he told him of his
thought. The man said, "I have never seen such a day on which a Muslim is
faced with such an accusation." 'Umar said, "I am determined that you
should tell me the truth." He said, "I was a foreteller in the pre-lslamic period
of ignorance." Then 'Umar said, "Tell me the most astonishing thing your
female Jinn has told you of." He said, "One-day while I was in the market,
she came to me scared and said, 'Haven't you seen the Jinns and their
despair and they were overthrown after their defeat (and prevented from
listening to the news of the heaven) so that they (stopped going to the sky
and) kept following camel-riders (i.e. 'Arabs)?" 'Umar said, "He is right." and
added, "One day while I was near their idols, there came a man with a calf
and slaughtered it as a sacrifice (for the idols). An (unseen) creature
shouted at him, and I have never heard harsher than his voice. He was
crying, 'O you bold evil-doer! A matter of success! An eloquent man is saying:
None has the right to be worshipped except you (O Allah).' On that the
people fled, but I said, 'I shall not go away till I know what is behind this.'
Then the cry came again: 'O you bold evil-doer! A matter of success! An
eloquent man is saying: None has the right to be worshipped except Allah.' I
then went away and a few days later it was said, "A prophet has appeared."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 207:
Narrated Qais:
I heard Said bin Zaid saying to the people, "If you but saw me and 'Umar's
sister tied and forced by 'Umar to leave Islam while he was not yet a Muslim.
And if the mountain of Uhud could move from its place for the evil which
you people have done to Uthman, it would have the right to do that."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 208:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The people of Mecca asked Allah's Apostle to show them a miracle. So he
showed them the moon split in two halves between which they saw the
Hiram' mountain.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 209:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The moon was split ( into two pieces ) while we were with the Prophet in
Mina. He said, "Be witnesses." Then a Piece of the moon went towards the
mountain.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 210:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
During the lifetime of Allah's Apostle the moon was split (into two places).
Volume 5, Book 58, Number 211:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The moon was split (into two pieces).

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 212:
Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin 'Adi bin Al-Khiyar:
That Al-Miswar bin Makhrama and 'Abdur-Rahman bin Al-Aswad bin 'Abu
Yaghuth had said to him, "What prevents you from speaking to your uncle
'Uthman regarding his brother Al-Walid bin 'Uqba?" The people were
speaking against the latter for what he had done. 'Ubaidullah said, "So I
kept waiting for 'Uthman, and when he went out for the prayer, I said to
him, 'I have got something to say to you as a piece of advice.' 'Uthman said,
'O man! I seek Refuge with Allah from you. So I went away. When I finished
my prayer, I sat with Al-Miswar and Ibn 'Abu Yaghuth and talked to both of
them of what I had said to 'Uthman and what he had said to me. They said,
'You have done your duty.' So while I was sitting with them. 'Uthman's
Messenger came to me. They said, 'Allah has put you to trial." I set out and
when I reached 'Uthman, he said, 'What is your advice which you mentioned
a while ago?' I recited Tashahhud and added, 'Allah has sent Muhammad and
has revealed the Holy Book (i.e. Quran) to him. You (O Uthman!) were
amongst those who responded to the call of Allah and His Apostle and had
faith in him. And you took part in the first two migrations (to Ethiopia and to
Medina), and you enjoyed the company of Allah's Apostle and learned his
traditions and advice. Now the people are talking much about Al-Walid bin
'Uqba and so it is your duty to impose on him the legal punishment.'
'Uthman then said to me, 'O my nephew! Did you ever meet Allah's Apostle
?' I said, 'No, but his knowledge has reached me as it has reached the virgin
in her seclusion.' 'Uthman then recited Tashahhud and said, 'No doubt, Allah
has sent Muhammad with the Truth and has revealed to him His Holy Book
(i.e. Quran) and I was amongst those who responded to the call of Allah and
His Apostle and I had faith in Muhammad's Mission, and I had performed the
first two migrations as you have said, and I enjoyed the company of Allah's
Apostle and gave the pledge of allegiance to him. By Allah, I never
disobeyed him and never cheated him till Allah caused him to die. Then Allah
made Abu Bakr Caliph, and by Allah, I was never disobedient to him, nor did I
cheat him. Then 'Umar became Caliph, and by Allah, I was never disobedient
to him, nor did I cheat him. Then I became Caliph. Have I not then the same
rights over you as they had over me?' I replied in the affirmative. 'Uthman
further said, 'The what are these talks which are reaching me from you? As
for what you ha mentioned about Al-Walid bin 'Uqb; Allah willing, I shall give
him the leg; punishment justly. Then Uthman ordered that Al-Walid be
flogged fort lashes. He ordered 'Ali to flog him an he himself flogged him as
well."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 213:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Um Habiba and Um Salama mentioned a church they had seen in Ethiopia
and in the church there were pictures. When they told the Prophet of this,
he said, "Those people are such that if a pious man amongst them died, they
build a place of worship over his grave and paint these pictures in it. Those
people will be Allah's worst creatures on the Day of Resurrection . "

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 214:
Narrated Um Khalid bint Khalid:
When I came from Ethiopia (to Medina), I was a young girl. Allah's Apostle
made me wear a sheet having marks on it. Allah's Apostle was rubbing those
marks with his hands saying, "Sanah! Sanah!" (i.e. good, good).

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 215:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
We used to greet the Prophet while he used to be in prayers, and he used to
reply to our greetings. But when we came back from Najashi (the King of
Ethiopia) we greeted him (while he was praying) and he did not reply to us.
We said, "O Allah's Apostle! We used to greet you in the past and you used
to reply to us." He said, "Verily The Mind is occupied and busy with more
important matter during the prayer." (So one cannot return One's
greetings.)

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 216:
Narrated Abu Musa:
We received the news of the departure of the Prophet (to Medina) while we
were in Yemen. So we went on board a ship but our ship took us away to AnNajashi (the Negus) in Ethiopia. There we met Ja'far bin Abi Talib and stayed
with him till we came (to Medina) by the time when the Prophet had
conquered Khaibar. The Prophet said, "O you people of the ship! You will
have (the reward of) two migrations."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 217:
Narrated Jabir:
When Negus died, the Prophet said, "Today a pious man has died. So get up
and offer the funeral prayer for your brother Ashama

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 218:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah Al-Ansari:
Allah's Apostle led the funeral prayer for the Negus and made us stand in
rows behind him and I was in the second or third row.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 219:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet offered the funeral prayer for Ashama, the Negus, with four
Takbir.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 220:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
that Allah's Apostle informed them (i.e. his companions) of the death of
Negus, the king of Ethiopia, on the very day on which the latter died, and
said, "Ask Allah's Forgiveness for your brother" Abu Huraira further said,
"Allah's Apostle made them (i.e. the Muslims) stand in rows at the Musalla
(i.e. praying place) and led the funeral prayer for the Negus and said four
Takbir."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 221:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle, while going out for the battle of Hunain, said, "Tomorrow
Allah willing, we will encamp at Khaif Bani Kinana where the pagans(of
Quraish) took the oath of Kufr (against the Prophet i.e. to be loyal to
heathenism, by boycotting Banu Hashim, the Prophet's folk, See Hadith No.
659 Vol. 2) .

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 222:
Narrated Al-Abbas bin 'Abdul Muttalib:
That he said to the Prophet "You have not been of any avail to your uncle
(Abu Talib) (though) by Allah, he used to protect you and used to become
angry on your behalf." The Prophet said, "He is in a shallow fire, and had It
not been for me, he would have been in the bottom of the (Hell) Fire."
Volume 5, Book 58, Number 223:
Narrated Al-Musaiyab:
When Abu Talib was in his death bed, the Prophet went to him while Abu
Jahl was sitting beside him. The Prophet said, "O my uncle! Say: None has
the right to be worshipped except Allah, an expression I will defend your
case with, before Allah." Abu Jahl and 'Abdullah bin Umaya said, "O Abu
Talib! Will you leave the religion of 'Abdul Muttalib?" So they kept on saying
this to him so that the last statement he said to them (before he died) was:
"I am on the religion of 'Abdul Muttalib." Then the Prophet said, " I will keep
on asking for Allah's Forgiveness for you unless I am forbidden to do so."
Then the following Verse was revealed:-"It is not fitting for the Prophet and the believers to ask Allah's Forgiveness
for the pagans, even if they were their near relatives, after it has become
clear to them that they are the dwellers of the (Hell) Fire." (9.113)
The other Verse was also revealed:-- "(O Prophet!) Verily, you guide not
whom you like, but Allah guides whom He will ......." (28.56)

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 224:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
That he heard the Prophet when somebody mentioned his uncle (i.e. Abu
Talib), saying, "Perhaps my intercession will be helpful to him on the Day of
Resurrection so that he may be put in a shallow fire reaching only up to his
ankles. His brain will boil from it."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 225:
Narrated Yazid:
(as above, Hadith 224) using the words: "will make his brain boil."
Volume 5, Book 58, Number 226:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
That he heard Allah's Apostle saying, "When the people of Quraish did not
believe me (i.e. the story of my Night Journey), I stood up in Al-Hijr and Allah
displayed Jerusalem in front of me, and I began describing it to them while I
was looking at it."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 227:
Narrated Abbas bin Malik:
Malik bin Sasaa said that Allah's Apostle described to them his Night Journey
saying, "While I was lying in Al-Hatim or Al-Hijr, suddenly someone came to
me and cut my body open from here to here." I asked Al-Jarud who was by
my side, "What does he mean?" He said, "It means from his throat to his
pubic area," or said, "From the top of the chest." The Prophet further said,
"He then took out my heart. Then a gold tray of Belief was brought to me
and my heart was washed and was filled (with Belief) and then returned to
its original place. Then a white animal which was smaller than a mule and
bigger than a donkey was brought to me." (On this Al-Jarud asked, "Was it
the Buraq, O Abu Hamza?" I (i.e. Anas) replied in the affirmative). The
Prophet said, "The animal's step (was so wide that it) reached the farthest
point within the reach of the animal's sight. I was carried on it, and Gabriel
set out with me till we reached the nearest heaven.
When he asked for the gate to be opened, it was asked, 'Who is it?' Gabriel
answered, 'Gabriel.' It was asked, 'Who is accompanying you?' Gabriel
replied, 'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has Muhammad been called?' Gabriel
replied in the affirmative. Then it was said, 'He is welcomed. What an
excellent visit his is!' The gate was opened, and when I went over the first
heaven, I saw Adam there. Gabriel said (to me). 'This is your father, Adam;
pay him your greetings.' So I greeted him and he returned the greeting to
me and said, 'You are welcomed, O pious son and pious Prophet.' Then
Gabriel ascended with me till we reached the second heaven. Gabriel asked
for the gate to be opened. It was asked, 'Who is it?' Gabriel answered,
'Gabriel.' It was asked, 'Who is accompanying you?' Gabriel replied,
'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has he been called?' Gabriel answered in the
affirmative. Then it was said, 'He is welcomed. What an excellent visit his is!'
The gate was opened.
When I went over the second heaven, there I saw Yahya (i.e. John) and 'Isa
(i.e. Jesus) who were cousins of each other. Gabriel said (to me), 'These are
John and Jesus; pay them your greetings.' So I greeted them and both of
them returned my greetings to me and said, 'You are welcomed, O pious
brother and pious Prophet.' Then Gabriel ascended with me to the third
heaven and asked for its gate to be opened. It was asked, 'Who is it?' Gabriel
replied, 'Gabriel.' It was asked, 'Who is accompanying you?' Gabriel replied,
'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has he been called?' Gabriel replied in the
affirmative. Then it was said, 'He is welcomed, what an excellent visit his is!'
The gate was opened, and when I went over the third heaven there I saw
Joseph. Gabriel said (to me), 'This is Joseph; pay him your greetings.' So I
greeted him and he returned the greeting to me and said, 'You are
welcomed, O pious brother and pious Prophet.' Then Gabriel ascended with
me to the fourth heaven and asked for its gate to be opened. It was asked,
'Who is it?' Gabriel replied, 'Gabriel' It was asked, 'Who is accompanying
you?' Gabriel replied, 'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has he been called?'
Gabriel replied in the affirmative. Then it was said, 'He is welcomed, what an
excel lent visit his is!'
The gate was opened, and when I went over the fourth heaven, there I saw
Idris. Gabriel said (to me), 'This is Idris; pay him your greetings.' So I greeted
him and he returned the greeting to me and said, 'You are welcomed, O
pious brother and pious Prophet.' Then Gabriel ascended with me to the
fifth heaven and asked for its gate to be opened. It was asked, 'Who is it?'
Gabriel replied, 'Gabriel.' It was asked. 'Who is accompanying you?' Gabriel
replied, 'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has he been called?' Gabriel replied in
the affirmative. Then it was said He is welcomed, what an excellent visit his
is! So when I went over the fifth heaven, there I saw Harun (i.e. Aaron),
Gabriel said, (to me). This is Aaron; pay him your greetings.' I greeted him
and he returned the greeting to me and said, 'You are welcomed, O pious
brother and pious Prophet.' Then Gabriel ascended with me to the sixth
heaven and asked for its gate to be opened. It was asked. 'Who is it?' Gabriel
replied, 'Gabriel.' It was asked, 'Who is accompanying you?' Gabriel replied,
'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has he been called?' Gabriel replied in the
affirmative. It was said, 'He is welcomed. What an excellent visit his is!'
When I went (over the sixth heaven), there I saw Moses. Gabriel said (to
me),' This is Moses; pay him your greeting. So I greeted him and he returned
the greetings to me and said, 'You are welcomed, O pious brother and pious
Prophet.' When I left him (i.e. Moses) he wept. Someone asked him, 'What
makes you weep?' Moses said, 'I weep because after me there has been sent
(as Prophet) a young man whose followers will enter Paradise in greater
numbers than my followers.' Then Gabriel ascended with me to the seventh
heaven and asked for its gate to be opened. It was asked, 'Who is it?' Gabriel
replied, 'Gabriel.' It was asked,' Who is accompanying you?' Gabriel replied,
'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has he been called?' Gabriel replied in the
affirmative. Then it was said, 'He is welcomed. What an excellent visit his is!'
So when I went (over the seventh heaven), there I saw Abraham. Gabriel
said (to me), 'This is your father; pay your greetings to him.' So I greeted him
and he returned the greetings to me and said, 'You are welcomed, O pious
son and pious Prophet.' Then I was made to ascend to Sidrat-ul-Muntaha
(i.e. the Lote Tree of the utmost boundary) Behold! Its fruits were like the
jars of Hajr (i.e. a place near Medina) and its leaves were as big as the ears of
elephants. Gabriel said, 'This is the Lote Tree of the utmost boundary) .
Behold ! There ran four rivers, two were hidden and two were visible, I
asked, 'What are these two kinds of rivers, O Gabriel?' He replied,' As for the
hidden rivers, they are two rivers in Paradise and the visible rivers are the
Nile and the Euphrates.'
Then Al-Bait-ul-Ma'mur (i.e. the Sacred House) was shown to me and a
container full of wine and another full of milk and a third full of honey were
brought to me. I took the milk. Gabriel remarked, 'This is the Islamic religion
which you and your followers are following.' Then the prayers were
enjoined on me: They were fifty prayers a day. When I returned, I passed by
Moses who asked (me), 'What have you been ordered to do?' I replied, 'I
have been ordered to offer fifty prayers a day.' Moses said, 'Your followers
cannot bear fifty prayers a day, and by Allah, I have tested people before
you, and I have tried my level best with Bani Israel (in vain). Go back to your
Lord and ask for reduction to lessen your followers' burden.' So I went back,
and Allah reduced ten prayers for me. Then again I came to Moses, but he
repeated the same as he had said before. Then again I went back to Allah
and He reduced ten more prayers. When I came back to Moses he said the
same, I went back to Allah and He ordered me to observe ten prayers a day.
When I came back to Moses, he repeated the same advice, so I went back to
Allah and was ordered to observe five prayers a day.
When I came back to Moses, he said, 'What have you been ordered?' I
replied, 'I have been ordered to observe five prayers a day.' He said, 'Your
followers cannot bear five prayers a day, and no doubt, I have got an
experience of the people before you, and I have tried my level best with
Bani Israel, so go back to your Lord and ask for reduction to lessen your
follower's burden.' I said, 'I have requested so much of my Lord that I feel
ashamed, but I am satisfied now and surrender to Allah's Order.' When I left,
I heard a voice saying, 'I have passed My Order and have lessened the
burden of My Worshipers."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 228:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Regarding the Statement of Allah"
"And We granted the vision (Ascension to the heavens) which We made you
see (as an actual eye witness) was only made as a trial for the people."
(17.60)
Ibn Abbas added: The sights which Allah's Apostle was shown on the Night
Journey when he was taken to Bait-ulMaqdis (i.e. Jerusalem) were actual
sights, (not dreams). And the Cursed Tree (mentioned) in the Quran is the
tree of Zaqqum (itself) .

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 229:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Ka'b:
Who was Kab's guide when Ka'b turned blind: I heard Ka'b bin Malik
narrating: When he remained behind (i.e. did not Join) the Prophet in the
Ghazwa of Tabuk. Ibn Bukair, in his narration stated that Ka'b said, " I
witnessed the Al-'Aqaba pledge of allegiance at night with the Prophet
when we jointly agreed to support Islam with all our efforts I would not like
to have attended the Badr battle instead of that 'Aqaba pledge although
Badr is more well-known than it, amongst the people."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 230:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
I was present with my two maternal uncles at Al-'Aqaba (where the pledge
of allegiance was given). (Ibn 'Uyaina said, "One of the two was Al-Bara' bin
Marur.")

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 231:
Narrated Jabir:
My father, my two maternal uncles and I were among those who took part
in the 'Aqaba Pledge.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 232:
Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit:
Who had taken part in the battle of Badr with Allah's Apostle and had been
amongst his companions on the night of Al-'Aqaba Pledge: Allah's Apostle,
surrounded by a group of his companions said, "Come along and give me
the pledge of allegiance that you will not worship anything besides Allah,
will not steal, will not commit illegal sexual intercourse will not kill your
children, will not utter; slander, invented by yourself, and will not disobey
me if I order you to do something good. Whoever among you will respect
and fulfill this pledge, will be rewarded by Allah. And if one of you commits
any of these sins and is punished in this world then that will be his expiation
for it, and if one of you commits any of these sins and Allah screens his sin,
then his matter, will rest with Allah: If He will, He will punish him and if He
will,. He will excuse him." So I gave the pledge of allegiance to him for these
conditions.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 233:
Narrated 'Ubada bin As Samit:
I was one of the Naqibs who gave the ('Aqaba) Pledge of Allegiance to
Allah's Apostle . We gave the pledge of allegiance to him that we would not
worship anything other than Allah, would not steal, would not commit
illegal sexual intercourse, would not kill a person whose killing Allah has
made illegal except rightfully, would not rob each other, and we would not
be promised Paradise jf we did the above sins, then if we committed one of
the above sins, Allah will give His Judgment concerning it.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 234:
Narrated Aisha:
The Prophet engaged me when I was a girl of six (years). We went to
Medina and stayed at the home of Bani-al-Harith bin Khazraj. Then I got ill
and my hair fell down. Later on my hair grew (again) and my mother, Um
Ruman, came to me while I was playing in a swing with some of my girl
friends. She called me, and I went to her, not knowing what she wanted to
do to me. She caught me by the hand and made me stand at the door of the
house. I was breathless then, and when my breathing became Allright, she
took some water and rubbed my face and head with it. Then she took me
into the house. There in the house I saw some Ansari women who said,
"Best wishes and Allah's Blessing and a good luck." Then she entrusted me
to them and they prepared me (for the marriage). Unexpectedly Allah's
Apostle came to me in the forenoon and my mother handed me over to him,
and at that time I was a girl of nine years of age.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 235:
Narrated 'Aisha:
That the Prophet said to her, "You have been shown to me twice in my
dream. I saw you pictured on a piece of silk and some-one said (to me). 'This
is your wife.' When I uncovered the picture, I saw that it was yours. I said, 'If
this is from Allah, it will be done."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 236:
Narrated Hisham's father:
Khadija died three years before the Prophet departed to Medina. He stayed
there for two years or so and then he married 'Aisha when she was a girl of
six years of age, and he consumed that marriage when she was nine years
old.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 237:
Narrated Abu Wail:
We visited Khabbaba who said, "We migrated with the Prophet for Allah's
Sake, so our reward became due and sure with Allah. Some of us passed
away without taking anything of their rewards (in this world) and one of
them was Mus'ab bin 'Umar who was martyred on the day (of the battle) of
Uhud leaving a striped woolen cloak. When we covered his head with it, his
feet became naked, and when covered his feet, his head became naked.
So Allah's Apostle ordered us to cover his head and put some Idhkhir (i.e. a
special kind of grass) on his feet. (On the other hand) some of us have had
their fruits ripened (in this world) and they are collecting them."
Volume 5, Book 58, Number 238:
Narrated 'Umar:
I heard the Prophet saying, "The reward of deeds depends on the
intentions, so whoever emigrated for the worldly benefits or to marry a
woman, his emigration was for that for which he emigrated, but whoever
emigrated for the Sake of Allah and His Apostle, his emigration is for Allah
and His Apostle."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 239:
Narrated Mujahid bin Jabir Al-Makki:
Abdullah bin 'Umar used to say, "There is no more Hijrah (i.e. migration)
after the Conquest of Mecca."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 240:
Narrated 'Ata bin Abi Rabah:
'Ubaid bin 'Umar Al-Laithi and I visited Aisha and asked her about the Hijra
(i.e. migration), and she said, "Today there is no (Hijrah) emigration. A
believer used to run away with his religion to Allah and His Apostle lest he
should be put to trial because of his religion. Today Allah has made Islam
triumphant, and today a believer can worship his Lord wherever he likes. But
the deeds that are still rewardable (in place of emigration) are Jihad and
good intentions." (See Hadith No. 42 Vol. 4).

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 241:
Narrated Aisha:
Sad said, "O Allah! You know that there is none against whom I am eager to
fight more willingly for Your Cause than those people who disbelieved You
Apostle and drove him out (of his city). O Allah! I think that You have ended
the fight between us and them."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 242:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Allah's Apostle started receiving the Divine Inspiration at the age of forty.
Then he stayed in Mecca for thirteen years, receiving the Divine Revelation.
Then he was ordered to migrate and he lived as an Emigrant for ten years
and then died at the age of sixty-three (years).

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 243:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Allah's Apostle stayed in Mecca for thirteen years (after receiving the first
Divine Inspiration) and died at the age of sixty-three.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 244:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle sat on the pulpit and said, "Allah has given one of His Slaves
the choice of receiving the splendor and luxury of the worldly life whatever
he likes or to accept the good (of the Hereafter) which is with Allah. So he
has chosen that good which is with Allah." On that Abu Bakr wept and said,
"Our fathers and mothers be sacrificed for you." We became astonished at
this. The people said, "Look at this old man! Allah's Apostle talks about a
Slave of Allah to whom He has given the option to choose either the
splendor of this worldly life or the good which is with Him, while he says.
'our fathers and mothers be sacrifice(i for you." But it was Allah's Apostle
who had been given option, and Abu Bakr knew it better than we. Allah's
Apostle added, "No doubt, I am indebted to Abu Bakr more than to anybody
else regarding both his companionship and his wealth. And if I had to take a
Khalil from my followers, I would certainly have taken Abu Bakr, but the
fraternity of Islam is. sufficient. Let no door (i.e. Khoukha) of the Mosque
remain open, except the door of Abu Bakr."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 245:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) I never remembered my parents believing in any
religion other than the true religion (i.e. Islam), and (I don't remember) a
single day passing without our being visited by Allah's Apostle in the
morning and in the evening. When the Muslims were put to test (i.e.
troubled by the pagans), Abu Bakr set out migrating to the land of Ethiopia,
and when he reached Bark-al-Ghimad, Ibn Ad-Daghina, the chief of the tribe
of Qara, met him and said, "O Abu Bakr! Where are you going?" Abu Bakr
replied, "My people have turned me out (of my country), so I want to
wander on the earth and worship my Lord." Ibn Ad-Daghina said, "O Abu
Bakr! A man like you should not leave his home-land, nor should he be driven
out, because you help the destitute, earn their livings, and you keep good
relations with your Kith and kin, help the weak and poor, entertain guests
generously, and help the calamity-stricken persons. Therefore I am your
protector. Go back and worship your Lord in your town."
So Abu Bakr returned and Ibn Ad-Daghina accompanied him. In the evening
Ibn Ad-Daghina visited the nobles of Quraish and said to them. "A man like
Abu Bakr should not leave his homeland, nor should he be driven out. Do
you (i.e. Quraish) drive out a man who helps the destitute, earns their living,
keeps good relations with his Kith and kin, helps the weak and poor,
entertains guests generously and helps the calamity-stricken persons?" So
the people of Quraish could not refuse Ibn Ad-Daghina's protection, and
they said to Ibn Ad-Daghina, "Let Abu Bakr worship his Lord in his house. He
can pray and recite there whatever he likes, but he should not hurt us with
it, and should not do it publicly, because we are afraid that he may affect our
women and children." Ibn Ad-Daghina told Abu Bakr of all that. Abu Bakr
stayed in that state, worshipping his Lord in his house. He did not pray
publicly, nor did he recite Quran outside his house.
Then a thought occurred to Abu Bakr to build a mosque in front of his
house, and there he used to pray and recite the Quran. The women and
children of the pagans began to gather around him in great number. They
used to wonder at him and look at him. Abu Bakr was a man who used to
weep too much, and he could not help weeping on reciting the Quran. That
situation scared the nobles of the pagans of Quraish, so they sent for Ibn AdDaghina. When he came to them, they said, "We accepted your protection
of Abu Bakr on condition that he should worship his Lord in his house, but
he has violated the conditions and he has built a mosque in front of his
house where he prays and recites the Quran publicly. We are now afraid that
he may affect our women and children unfavorably. So, prevent him from
that. If he likes to confine the worship of his Lord to his house, he may do
so, but if he insists on doing that openly, ask him to release you from your
obligation to protect him, for we dislike to break our pact with you, but we
deny Abu Bakr the right to announce his act publicly." Ibn Ad-Daghina went
to Abu- Bakr and said, ("O Abu Bakr!) You know well what contract I have
made on your behalf; now, you are either to abide by it, or else release me
from my obligation of protecting you, because I do not want the 'Arabs hear
that my people have dishonored a contract I have made on behalf of
another man." Abu Bakr replied, "I release you from your pact to protect
me, and am pleased with the protection from Allah."
At that time the Prophet was in Mecca, and he said to the Muslims, "In a
dream I have been shown your migration place, a land of date palm trees,
between two mountains, the two stony tracts." So, some people migrated
to Medina, and most of those people who had previously migrated to the
land of Ethiopia, returned to Medina. Abu Bakr also prepared to leave for
Medina, but Allah's Apostle said to him, "Wait for a while, because I hope
that I will be allowed to migrate also." Abu Bakr said, "Do you indeed expect
this? Let my father be sacrificed for you!" The Prophet said, "Yes." So Abu
Bakr did not migrate for the sake of Allah's Apostle in order to accompany
him. He fed two she-camels he possessed with the leaves of As-Samur tree
that fell on being struck by a stick for four months.
One day, while we were sitting in Abu Bakr's house at noon, someone said
to Abu Bakr, "This is Allah's Apostle with his head covered coming at a time
at which he never used to visit us before." Abu Bakr said, "May my parents
be sacrificed for him. By Allah, he has not come at this hour except for a
great necessity." So Allah's Apostle came and asked permission to enter,
and he was allowed to enter. When he entered, he said to Abu Bakr. "Tell
everyone who is present with you to go away." Abu Bakr replied, "There are
none but your family. May my father be sacrificed for you, O Allah's
Apostle!" The Prophet said, "i have been given permission to migrate." Abu
Bakr said, "Shall I accompany you? May my father be sacrificed for you, O
Allah's Apostle!" Allah's Apostle said, "Yes." Abu Bakr said, "O Allah's
Apostle! May my father be sacrificed for you, take one of these two shecamels of mine." Allah's Apostle replied, "(I will accept it) with payment." So
we prepared the baggage quickly and put some journey food in a leather
bag for them. Asma, Abu Bakr's daughter, cut a piece from her waist belt
and tied the mouth of the leather bag with it, and for that reason she was
named Dhat-un-Nitaqain (i.e. the owner of two belts).
Then Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr reached a cave on the mountain of Thaur
and stayed there for three nights. 'Abdullah bin Abi Bakr who was intelligent
and a sagacious youth, used to stay (with them) aver night. He used to leave
them before day break so that in the morning he would be with Quraish as if
he had spent the night in Mecca. He would keep in mind any plot made
against them, and when it became dark he would (go and) inform them of it.
'Amir bin Fuhaira, the freed slave of Abu Bakr, used to bring the milch sheep
(of his master, Abu Bakr) to them a little while after nightfall in order to rest
the sheep there. So they always had fresh milk at night, the milk of their
sheep, and the milk which they warmed by throwing heated stones in it.
'Amir bin Fuhaira would then call the herd away when it was still dark
(before daybreak). He did the same in each of those three nights. Allah's
Apostle and Abu Bakr had hired a man from the tribe of Bani Ad-Dail from
the family of Bani Abd bin Adi as an expert guide, and he was in alliance with
the family of Al-'As bin Wail As-Sahmi and he was on the religion of the
infidels of Quraish. The Prophet and Abu Bakr trusted him and gave him
their two she-camels and took his promise to bring their two she camels to
the cave of the mountain of Thaur in the morning after three nights later.
And (when they set out), 'Amir bin Fuhaira and the guide went along with
them and the guide led them along the sea-shore.
The nephew of Suraqa bin Ju'sham said that his father informed him that he
heard Suraqa bin Ju'sham saying, "The messengers of the heathens of
Quraish came to us declaring that they had assigned for the persons why
would kill or arrest Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr, a reward equal to their
bloodmoney. While I was sitting in one of the gatherings of my tribe. Bani
Mudlij, a man from them came to us and stood up while we were sitting, and
said, "O Suraqa! No doubt, I have just seen some people far away on the
seashore, and I think they are Muhammad and his companions." Suraqa
added, "I too realized that it must have been they. But I said 'No, it is not
they, but you have seen so-and-so, and so-and-so whom we saw set out.' I
stayed in the gathering for a while and then got up and left for my home.
and ordered my slave-girl to get my horse which was behind a hillock, and
keep it ready for me.
Then I took my spear and left by the back door of my house dragging the
lower end of the spear on the ground and keeping it low. Then I reached my
horse, mounted it and made it gallop. When I approached them (i.e.
Muhammad and Abu Bakr), my horse stumbled and I fell down from it, Then
I stood up, got hold of my quiver and took out the divining arrows and drew
lots as to whether I should harm them (i.e. the Prophet and Abu Bakr) or
not, and the lot which I disliked came out. But I remounted my horse and let
it gallop, giving no importance to the divining arrows. When I heard the
recitation of the Quran by Allah's Apostle who did not look hither and
thither while Abu Bakr was doing it often, suddenly the forelegs of my horse
sank into the ground up to the knees, and I fell down from it. Then I rebuked
it and it got up but could hardly take out its forelegs from the ground, and
when it stood up straight again, its fore-legs caused dust to rise up in the sky
like smoke. Then again I drew lots with the divining arrows, and the lot
which I disliked, came out. So I called upon them to feel secure. They
stopped, and I remounted my horse and went to them. When I saw how I
had been hampered from harming them, it came to my mind that the cause
of Allah's Apostle (i.e. Islam) will become victorious. So I said to him, "Your
people have assigned a reward equal to the bloodmoney for your head."
Then I told them all the plans the people of Mecca had made concerning
them. Then I offered them some journey food and goods but they refused
to take anything and did not ask for anything, but the Prophet said, "Do not
tell others about us." Then I requested him to write for me a statement of
security and peace. He ordered 'Amr bin Fuhaira who wrote it for me on a
parchment, and then Allah's Apostle proceeded on his way.
Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair: Allah's Apostle met Az-Zubair in a caravan of
Muslim merchants who were returning from Sham. Az-Zubair provided
Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr with white clothes to wear. When the Muslims
of Medina heard the news of the departure of Allah's Apostle from Mecca
(towards Medina), they started going to the Harra every morning . They
would wait for him till the heat of the noon forced them to return. One day,
after waiting for a long while, they returned home, and when they went into
their houses, a Jew climbed up the roof of one of the forts of his people to
look for some thing, and he saw Allah's Apostle and his companions dressed
in white clothes, emerging out of the desert mirage.
The Jew could not help shouting at the top of his voice, "O you 'Arabs! Here
is your great man whom you have been waiting for!" So all the Muslims
rushed to their arms and received Allah's Apostle on the summit of Harra.
The Prophet turned with them to the right and alighted at the quarters of
Bani 'Amr bin 'Auf, and this was on Monday in the month of Rabi-ul-Awal.
Abu Bakr stood up, receiving the people while Allah's Apostle sat down and
kept silent. Some of the Ansar who came and had not seen Allah's Apostle
before, began greeting Abu Bakr, but when the sunshine fell on Allah's
Apostle and Abu Bakr came forward and shaded him with his sheet only
then the people came to know Allah's Apostle. Allah's Apostle stayed with
Bani 'Amr bin 'Auf for ten nights and established the mosque (mosque of
Quba) which was founded on piety. Allah's Apostle prayed in it and then
mounted his she-camel and proceeded on, accompanied by the people till
his she-camel knelt down at (the place of) the Mosque of Allah's Apostle at
Medina. Some Muslims used to pray there in those days, and that place was
a yard for drying dates belonging to Suhail and Sahl, the orphan boys who
were under the guardianship of 'Asad bin Zurara. When his she-camel knelt
down, Allah's Apostle said, "This place, Allah willing, will be our abiding
place." Allah's Apostle then called the two boys and told them to suggest a
price for that yard so that he might take it as a mosque. The two boys said,
"No, but we will give it as a gift, O Allah's Apostle!" Allah's Apostle then built
a mosque there. The Prophet himself started carrying unburnt bricks for its
building and while doing so, he was saying "This load is better than the load
of Khaibar, for it is more pious in the Sight of Allah and purer and better
rewardable." He was also saying, "O Allah! The actual reward is the reward
in the Hereafter, so bestow Your Mercy on the Ansar and the Emigrants."
Thus the Prophet recited (by way of proverb) the poem of some Muslim
poet whose name is unknown to me.
(Ibn Shibab said, "In the Hadiths it does not occur that Allah's Apostle
recited a complete poetic verse other than this one.")

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 246:
Narrated Asma:
I prepared the journey food for the Prophet and Abu Bakr when they
wanted (to migrate to) Medina. I said to my father (Abu Bakr), "I do not
have anything to tie the container of the journey food with except my waist
belt." He said, "Divide it lengthwise into two." I did so, and for this reason I
was named 'Dhat-un-Nitaqain' (i.e. the owner of two belts). (Ibn 'Abbas said,
"Asma', Dhat-un-Nitaq.")

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 247:
Narrated Al-Bara:
When the Prophet migrated to Medina, Suraqa bin Malik bin Ju'sham
pursued him. The Prophet invoked evil on him, therefore the forelegs of his
horse sank into the ground. Suraqa said (to the Prophet ), "Invoke Allah to
rescue me, and I will not harm you. "The Prophet invoked Allah for him.
Then Allah's Apostle felt thirsty and he passed by a shepherd. Abu Bakr said,
"I took a bowl and milked a little milk in it and brought it to the Prophet and
he drank till I was pleased."
Volume 5, Book 58, Number 248:
Narrated Asma:
That she conceived 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair. She added, "I migrated to
Medina while I was at full term of pregnancy and alighted at Quba where I
gave birth to him. Then I brought him to the Prophet and put him in his lap.
The Prophet asked for a date, chewed it, and put some of its juice in the
child's mouth. So, the first thing that entered the child's stomach was the
saliva of Allah's Apostle. Then the Prophet rubbed the child's palate with a
date and invoked for Allah's Blessings on him, and he was the first child born
amongst the Emigrants in the Islamic Land (i.e. Medina).

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 249:
Narrated Aisha:
The first child who was born in the Islamic Land (i.e. Medina) amongst the
Emigrants, was 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair. They brought him to the Prophet.
The Prophet took a date, and after chewing it, put its juice in his mouth. So
the first thing that went into the child's stomach, was the saliva of the
Prophet

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 250:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle arrived at Medina with Abu Bakr, riding behind him on the
same camel. Abu Bakr was an elderly man known to the people, while
Allah's Apostle was a youth that was unknown. Thus, if a man met Abu Bakr,
he would day, "O Abu Bakr! Who is this man in front of you?" Abu Bakr
would say, "This man shows me the Way," One would think that Abu Bakr
meant the road, while in fact, Abu Bakr meant the way of virtue and good.
Then Abu Bakr looked behind and saw a horse-rider persuing them. He said,
"O Allah's Apostle! This is a horse-rider persuing us." The Prophet looked
behind and said, "O Allah! Cause him to fall down." So the horse threw him
down and got up neighing. After that the rider, Suraqa said, "O Allah's
Prophet! Order me whatever you want." The Prophet said, "Stay where you
are and do not allow anybody to reach us." So, in the first part of the day
Suraqa was an enemy of Allah's Prophet and in the last part of it, he was a
protector. Then Allah's Apostle alighted by the side of the Al-Harra and sent
a message to the Ansar, and they came to Allah's Prophet and Abu Bakr, and
having greeted them, they said, "Ride (your she-camels) safe and obeyed."
Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr rode and the Ansar, carrying their arms,
surrounded them. The news that Allah's Prophet had come circulated in
Medina. The people came out and were eagerly looking and saying "Allah's
Prophet has come! Allah's Prophet has come! So the Prophet went on till he
alighted near the house of Abu Aiyub. While the Prophet was speaking with
the family members of Abu Aiyub, 'Abdullah bin Salam heard the news of his
arrival while he himself was picking the dates for his family from his family
garden. He hurried to the Prophet carrying the dates which he had collected
for his family from the garden. He listened to Allah's Prophet and then went
home.
Then Allah's Prophet said, "Which is the nearest of the houses of our Kith
and kin?" Abu Aiyub replied, "Mine, O Allah's Prophet! This is my house and
this is my gate." The Prophet said, "Go and prepare a place for our midday
rest." Abu Aiyub said, "Get up (both of you) with Allah's Blessings." So when
Allah's Prophet went into the house, 'Abdullah bin Salaim came and said "I
testify that you (i.e. Muhammad) are Apostle of Allah and that you have
come with the Truth. The Jews know well that I am their chief and the son of
their chief and the most learned amongst them and the son of the most
learned amongst them. So send for them (i.e. Jews) and ask them about me
before they know that I have embraced Islam, for if they know that they will
say about me things which are not correct." So Allah's Apostle sent for
them, and they came and entered. Allah's Apostle said to them, "O (the
group of) Jews! Woe to you: be afraid of Allah. By Allah except Whom none
has the right to be worshipped, you people know for certain, that I am
Apostle of Allah and that I have come to you with the Truth, so embrace
Islam." The Jews replied, "We do not know this." So they said this to the
Prophet and he repeated it thrice. Then he said, "What sort of a man is
'Abdullah bin Salam amongst you?" They said, "He is our chief and the son of
our chief and the most learned man, and the son of the most learned
amongst us." He said, "What would you think if he should embrace Islam?"
They said, "Allah forbid! He can not embrace Islam." He said, " What would
you think if he should embrace Islam?" They said, "Allah forbid! He can not
embrace Islam." He said, "What would you think if he should embrace
Islam?" They said, "Allah forbid! He can not embrace Islam." He said, "O Ibn
Salaim! Come out to them." He came out and said, "O (the group of) Jews!
8e afraid of Allah except Whom none has the right to be worshipped. You
know for certain that he is Apostle of Allah and that he has brought a True
Religion!' They said, "You tell a lie." On that Allah's Apostle turned them out.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 251:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
Umar bin Al-Khattab fixed a grant of 4000 (Dirhams) for every Early
Emigrant (i.e. Muhajir) and fixed a grant of 3500 (Dirhams) only for Ibn
'Umar. Somebody said to 'Umar, "Ibn 'Umar is also one of the Early
Emigrants; why do you give him less than four-thousand?" 'Umar replied,
"His parents took him with them when they migrated, so he was not like the
one who had migrated by himself.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 252:
Narrated Khabbab:
We migrated with Allah's Apostle (See Hadith No. 253 below).

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 253:
Narrated Khabbab:
We migrated with Allah's Apostle seeking Allah's Countenance, so our
rewards became due and sure with Allah. Some of us passed away without
eating anything of their rewards in this world. One of these was Mus'ab bin
'Umar who was martyred on the day of the battle of Uhud. We did not find
anything to shroud his body with except a striped cloak. When we covered
his head with it, his feet remained uncovered, and when we covered his feet
with it, his head remained uncovered. So Allah's Apostle ordered us to cover
his head with it and put some Idhkhir (i.e. a kind of grass) over his feet. And
there are some amongst us whose fruits have ripened and they are
collecting them (i.e. they have received their rewards in this world).

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 254:
Narrated Abu Burda Bin Abi Musa Al-Ashari:
'Abdullah bin 'Umar said to me, "Do you know what my father said to your
father once?" I said, "No." He said, "My father said to your father, 'O Abu
Musa, will it please you that we will be rewarded for our conversion to Islam
with Allah's Apostle and our migration with him, and our Jihad with him and
all our good deeds which we did, with him, and that all the deeds we did
after his death will be disregarded whether good or bad?' Your father (i.e.
Abu Musa) said, 'No, by Allah, we took part in Jihad after Allah's Apostle ,
prayed and did plenty of good deeds, and many people have embraced
Islam at our hands, and no doubt, we expect rewards from Allah for these
good deeds.' On that my father (i.e. 'Umar) said, 'As for myself, By Him in
Whose Hand 'Umar's soul is, I wish that the deeds done by us at the time of
the Prophet remain rewardable while whatsoever we did after the death of
the Prophet be enough to save us from Punishment in that the good deeds
compensate for the bad ones.' " On that I said (to Ibn 'Umar), "By Allah,
your father was better than my father!"

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 255:
Narrated Abu 'Uthman:
I heard that Ibn 'Umar used to become angry if someone mentioned that he
had migrated before his father ('Umar), and he used to say, " 'Umar and I
came to Allah's Apostle and found him having his midday rest, so we
returned home. Then 'Umar sent me again (to the Prophet ) and said, 'Go
and see whether he is awake.' I went to him and entered his place and gave
him the pledge of allegiance. Then I went back to 'Umar and informed him
that the Prophet was awake. So we both went, running slowly, and when
'Umar entered his place, he gave him the pledge of allegiance and thereafter
I too gave him the pledge of allegiance,"

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 256:
Narrated Al-Bara:
Abu Bakr bought a (camel's) saddle from 'Azib, and I carried it for him. 'Azib
(i.e. my father) asked Abu Bakr regarding the journey of the migration of
Allah's Apostle. Abu Bakr said, "Close observers were appointed by our
enemies to watch us. So we went out at night and travelled throughout the
night and the following day till it was noon, then we perceived a rock and
went towards it, and there was some shade under it. I spread a cloak I had
with me for Allah's Apostle and then the Prophet layed on it. I went out to
guard him and all of a sudden I saw a shepherd coming with his sheep
looking for the same, the shade of the rock as we did, I asked him, 'O boy, to
whom do you belong?' He replied, 'I belong to so-and-so.' I asked him, 'Is
there some milk in your sheep?' He replied in the affirmative. I asked him,
'Will you milk?' He replied in the affirmative. Then he got hold of one of his
sheep. I said to him, 'Remove the dust from its udder.' Then he milked a little
milk. I had a water-skin with me which was tied with a piece of cloth. I had
prepared the water-skin for Allah's Apostle . So I poured some water over
the milk (container) till its bottom became cold. Then I brought the milk to
the Prophet and said, 'Drink, O Allah's Apostle.' Allah's Apostle drank till I
became pleased. Then we departed and the pursuers were following us." AlBara added: I then went with Abu Bakr into his home (carrying that saddle)
and there I saw his daughter 'Aisha Lying in a bed because of heavy fever
and I saw her father Abu Bakr kissing her cheek and saying, "How are you,
little daughter?"
Volume 5, Book 58, Number 257:
Narrated Anas:
(the servant of the Prophet) When the Prophet arrived (at Medina), there
was not a single companion of the Prophet who had grey and black hair
except Abu Bakr, and he dyed his hair with Henna' and Katam (i.e. plants
used for dying hair). Through another group of narrators, Anas bin Malik
said,. "When the Prophet arrived at Medina, the eldest amongst his
companions was Abu Bakr. He dyed his hair with Hinna and Katam till it
became of dark red color.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 258:
Narrate Aisha:
Abu Bakr married a woman from the tribe of Bani Kalb, called Um Bakr.
When Abu Bakr migrated to Medina, he divorced her and she was married
by her cousin, the poet who said the following poem lamenting the infidels
of Quraish:
"What is there kept in the well, The well of Badr, (The owners of) the trays
of Roasted camel humps? What is there kept in the well, The well of Badr,
(The owners of) lady singers And friends of the honorable companions; who
used to drink (wine) together, Um Bakr greets us With the greeting of
peace, But can I find peace After my people have gone? The Apostle tells us
that We shall live again, But what sort of life will owls and skulls live?:

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 259:
Narrated Abu Bakr:
I was with the Prophet in the Cave. When I raised my head, I saw the feet of
the people. I said, "O Allah's Apostle! If some of them should look down,
they will see us." The Prophet said, "O Abu Bakr, be quiet! (For we are) two
and Allah is the Third of us."
Volume 5, Book 58, Number 260:
Narrated Abu Said:
Once a bedouin came to the Prophet and asked him about the migration.
The Prophet said, "Mercy of Allah be on you! The migration is a quite
difficult matter. Have you got some camels?" He replied in the affirmative.
Then the Prophet said, "Do you give their Zakat?" He replied in the
affirmative. The Prophet said, "Do you let others benefit by their milk
gratis?" He replied in the affirmative. Then the Prophet asked, "Do you milk
them on their watering days and give their milk to the poor and needy?" He
replied in the affirmative. The Prophet, said, "Go on doing like this from
beyond the seas, and there is no doubt that Allah will not overlook any of
your good deeds."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 261:
Narrated Al-Bara:
The first people who came to us (in Medina) were Mus'ab bin 'Umar and Ibn
Um Maktum. Then came to us 'Ammar bin Yasir and Bilal.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 262:
Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib:
The first people who came to us (in Medina) were Mus'ab bin 'Umar and Ibn
Um Maktum who were teaching Qur'an to the people. Then their came Bilal.
Sad and 'Ammar bin Yasir. After that 'Umar bin Al-Khattab came along with
twenty other companions of the Prophet. Later on the Prophet himself (to
Medina) and I had never seen the people of Medina so joyful as they were
on the arrival of Allah's Apostle, for even the slave girls were saying, "Allah's
Apostle has arrived!" And before his arrival I had read the Sura starting
with:-- "Glorify the Name of your Lord, the Most High" (87.1) together with
other Suras of Al-Mufassal.
Volume 5, Book 58, Number 263:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When Allah's Apostle came to Medina, Abu Bakr and Bilal got fever, and I
went to both of them and said, "O my father, how do you feel? O Bilal, how
do you feel?" Whenever Abu Bakr's fever got worse, he would say, "Every
man will meet his death once in one morning while he will be among his
family, for death is really nearer to him than his leather shoe laces (to his
feet)." And whenever fever deserted Bilal, he would say aloud, "Would that I
know whether I shall spend a night in the valley (of Mecca) with Idhkhir and
Jalil (i.e. kinds of grass) around me, and whether I shall drink one day the
water of Mijannah, and whether I shall see once again the hills of Shamah
and Tafil?" Then I went to Allah's Apostle and told him of that. He said, "O
Allah, make us love Medina as much as or more than we used to love Mecca,
O Allah, make it healthy and bless its Sa' and Mud (i.e. measures), and take
away its fever to Al-Juhfa."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 264:
Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin Ad bin Khiyair:
I went to Uthman. After reciting Tashah-hud, he said,. "Then after no doubt,
Allah sent Muhammad with the Truth, and I was amongst those who
responded to the Call of Allah and His Prophet and believed in the message
of Muhammad. Then took part in the two migrations. I became the son-inlaw of Allah's Apostle and gave the pledge of allegiance to him By Allah, I
never disobeyed him, nor did I deceive him till Allah took him unto Him."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 265:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
During the last Hajj led by 'Umar, 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf returned to his
family at Mina and met me there. 'AbdurRahman said (to 'Umar), "O chief of
the believers! The season of Hajj is the season when there comes the scum
of the people (besides the good amongst them), so I recommend that you
should wait till you go back to Medina, for it is the place of Migration and
Sunna (i.e. the Prophet's tradition), and there you will be able to refer the
matter to the religious scholars and the nobles and the people of wise
opinions." 'Umar said, "I will speak of it in Medina on my very first sermon I
will deliver there."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 266:
Narrated 'Um al-'Ala:
An Ansari woman who gave the pledge of allegiance to the Prophet that the
Ansar drew lots concerning the dwelling of the Emigrants. 'Uthman bin
Maz'un was decided to dwell with them (i.e. Um al-'Ala's family), 'Uthman
fell ill and I nursed him till he died, and we covered him with his clothes.
Then the Prophet came to us and I (addressing the dead body) said, "O Abu
As-Sa'ib, may Allah's Mercy be on you! I bear witness that Allah has honored
you." On that the Prophet said, "How do you know that Allah has honored
him?" I replied, "I do not know. May my father and my mother be sacrificed
for you, O Allah's Apostle! But who else is worthy of it (if not 'Uthman)?" He
said, "As to him, by Allah, death has overtaken him, and I hope the best for
him. By Allah, though I am the Apostle of Allah, yet I do not know what Allah
will do to me," By Allah, I will never assert the piety of anyone after him.
That made me sad, and when I slept I saw in a dream a flowing stream for
'Uthman bin Maz'un. I went to Allah's Apostle and told him of it. He
remarked, "That symbolizes his (good) deeds."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 267:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The day of Bu'ath was a day (i.e. battle) which Allah caused to take place just
before the mission of His Apostle so that when Allah's Apostle came to
Medina, they (the tribes) had divided (into hostile groups) and their nobles
had been killed; and all that facilitated their conversion to Islam.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 268:
Narrated Aisha:
That once Abu Bakr came to her on the day of 'Id-ul-Fitr or 'Id ul Adha while
the Prophet was with her and there were two girl singers with her, singing
songs of the Ansar about the day of Buath. Abu Bakr said twice. "Musical
instrument of Satan!" But the Prophet said, "Leave them Abu Bakr, for every
nation has an 'Id (i.e. festival) and this day is our 'Id."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 269:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
When Allah's Apostle arrived at Medina, he alighted at the upper part of
Medina among the people called Bani 'Amr bin 'Auf and he stayed with them
for fourteen nights. Then he sent for the chiefs of Bani An-Najjar, and they
came, carrying their swords. As if I am just now looking at Allah's Apostle on
his she-camel with Abu Bakr riding behind him (on the same camel) and the
chiefs of Bani An-Najjar around him till he dismounted in the courtyard of
Abu Aiyub's home. The Prophet used to offer the prayer wherever the
prayer was due, and he would pray even in sheepfolds. Then he ordered that
the mosque be built. He sent for the chiefs of Banu An-Najjar, and when they
came, he said, "O Banu An-Najjar! Suggest to me the price of this garden of
yours." They replied "No! By Allah, we do not demand its price except from
Allah." In that garden there were the (following) things that I will tell you:
Graves of pagans, unleveled land with holes and pits etc., and date-palm
trees. Allah's Apostle ordered that the graves of the pagans be dug up and,
the unleveled land be leveled and the date-palm trees be cut down. The
trunks of the trees were arranged so as to form the wall facing the Qibla.
The Stone pillars were built at the sides of its gate. The companions of the
Prophet were carrying the stones and reciting some lyrics, and Allah's
Apostle . . was with them and they were saying, "O Allah! There is no good
Excel the good of the Hereafter, so bestow victory on the Ansar and the
Emigrants. "

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 270:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Humaid Az-Zuhri:
I heard 'Umar bin 'Abdul-Aziz asking As-Sa'ib, the nephew of An-Nimr. "What
have you heard about residing in Mecca?" The other said, "I heard Al-Ala bin
Al-Hadrami saying, Allah's Apostle said: An Emigrant is allowed to stay in
Mecca for three days after departing from Mina (i.e. after performing all the
ceremonies of Hajj)"

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 271:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
The Prophet's companions did not take as a starting date for the Muslim
calendar, the day, the Prophet had been sent as an Apostle or the day of his
death, but the day of his arrival at Medina.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 272:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Originally, two Rakat were prescribed in every prayer. When the Prophet
migrated (to Medina) four Rakat were enjoined, while the journey prayer
remained unchanged(i.e. two Rakat).

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 273:
Narrated Sad bin Malik:
In the year of Hajjat-ul-Wada' the Prophet visited me when I fell ill and was
about to die because of that illness. I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I am very ill as
you see, and I am a rich man and have no heir except my only daughter.
Shall I give 2/3 of my property in charity?" He said, "No." I said, "Shall I then
give one half of it in charity?" He said, "O Sad! Give 1/3 (in charity) and even
1/3 is too much. No doubt, it is better to leave your children rich than to
leave them poor, reduced to begging from others. And Allah will reward you
for whatever you spend with the intention of gaining Allah's Pleasure even if
it were a mouthful of food you put into your wives mouth." I said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Am I to be left behind (in Mecca) after my companions have gone?"
He said, "If you should be left behind, you will be upgraded and elevated for
every deed you will do with a desire to achieve Allah's Pleasure. I hope that
you will live long so that some people will benefit by you while others will be
harmed. O Allah! Please fulfill the migration of my companions and do not
make them turn back on their heels. But (we feel sorry for) the unlucky Sad
bin Khaulah." Allah's Apostle lamented his death in Mecca.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 274:
Narrated Anas:
When 'Abdur-Rahman bin Auf came to Medina and the Prophet established
the bond of brotherhood between him and Sad bin Ar-Rabi-al-Ansari, Saud
suggested that 'Abdur-Rahman should accept half of his property and
family. 'Abdur Rahman said, "May Allah bless you in your family and
property; guide me to the market." So 'Abdur-Rahman (while doing business
in the market) made some profit of some condensed dry yoghurt and
butter. After a few days the Prophet saw him wearing clothes stained with
yellow perfume. The Prophet asked, "What is this, O 'Abdur-Rahman?" He
said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have married an Ansar' woman." The Prophet
asked, "What have you given her as Mahr?" He (i.e. 'Abdur-Rahman) said, "A
piece of gold, about the weight of a date stone." Then the Prophet said,
Give a banquet, even though of a sheep."
Volume 5, Book 58, Number 275:
Narrated Anas:
When the news of the arrival of the Prophet at Medina reached 'Abdullah
bin Salam, he went to him to ask him about certain things, He said, "I am
going to ask you about three things which only a Prophet can answer: What
is the first sign of The Hour? What is the first food which the people of
Paradise will eat? Why does a child attract the similarity to his father or to his
mother?" The Prophet replied, "Gabriel has just now informed me of that."
Ibn Salam said, "He (i.e. Gabriel) is the enemy of the Jews amongst the
angels. The Prophet said, "As for the first sign of The Hour, it will be a fire
that will collect the people from the East to the West. As for the first meal
which the people of Paradise will eat, it will be the caudate (extra) lobe of
the fish-liver. As for the child, if the man's discharge proceeds the woman's
discharge, the child attracts the similarity to the man, and if the woman's
discharge proceeds the man's, then the child attracts the similarity to the
woman."
On this, 'Abdullah bin Salam said, "I testify that None has the right to be
worshipped except Allah, and that you are the Apostle of Allah." and added,
"O Allah's Apostle! Jews invent such lies as make one astonished, so please
ask them about me before they know about my conversion to I slam . " The
Jews came, and the Prophet said, "What kind of man is 'Abdullah bin Salam
among you?" They replied, "The best of us and the son of the best of us and
the most superior among us, and the son of the most superior among us.
"The Prophet said, "What would you think if 'Abdullah bin Salam should
embrace Islam?" They said, "May Allah protect him from that." The Prophet
repeated his question and they gave the same answer. Then 'Abdullah came
out to them and said, "I testify that None has the right to be worshipped
except Allah and that Muhammad is the Apostle of Allah!" On this, the Jews
said, "He is the most wicked among us and the son of the most wicked
among us." So they degraded him. On this, he (i.e. 'Abdullah bin Salam) said,
"It is this that I was afraid of, O Allah's Apostle.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 276:
Narrated Abu Al-Minhal 'AbdurRahman bin Mut'im:
A partner of mine sold some Dirhams on credit in the market. I said,
"Glorified be Allah! Is this legal?" He replied, "Glorified be Allah! By Allah,
when I sold them in the market, nobody objected to it." Then I asked AlBara' bin 'Azib (about it) he said, "We used to make such a transaction when
the Prophet came to Medina. So he said, 'There is no harm in it if it is done
from hand to hand, but it is not allowed on credit.' Go to Zaid bin Al- Arqam
and ask him about it for he was the greatest trader of all of us." So I asked
Zaid bin Al-Arqam., and he said the same (as Al-Bara) did."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 277:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Had only ten Jews (amongst their chiefs) believe me, all
the Jews would definitely have believed me."

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 278:
Narrated Abu Musa:
When the Prophet arrived at Medina, he noticed that some people among
the Jews used to respect Ashura' (i.e. 10th of Muharram) and fast on it. The
Prophet then said, "We have more right to observe fast on this day." and
ordered that fasting should be observed on it.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 279:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
When the Prophet arrived at Medina he found that the Jews observed fast
on the day of 'Ashura'. They were asked the reason for the fast. They
replied, "This is the day when Allah caused Moses and the children of Israel
to have victory over Pharaoh, so we fast on this day as a sign of glorifying
it." Allah's Apostle said, "We are closer to Moses than you." Then he ordered
that fasting on this day should be observed.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 280:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abbas:
The Prophet used to keep his hair falling loose while the pagans used to part
their hair, and the People of the Scriptures used to keep their hair falling
loose, and the Prophet liked to follow the People of the Scriptures in
matters about which he had not been instructed differently, but later on the
Prophet started parting his hair.

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 281:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
They, the people of the Scriptures, divided this Scripture into parts, believing
in some portions of it and disbelieving the others. (See 15:91)

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 282:
Narrated Salman Al-Farisi:
That he was sold (as a slave) by one master to another for more than ten
times (i.e between 13 and 19).

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 283:
Narrated Salman:
I am from Ram-Hurmuz (i.e. a Persian town).

Volume 5, Book 58, Number 284:
Narrated Salman:
The interval between Jesus and Muhammad was six hundred years.
BOOK 59. MILITARY EXPEDITIONS LED BY THE PROPHET (PBUH) (ALMAGHAAZI) (285-749)
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 285:
Narrated Abu Ishaq:
Once, while I was sitting beside Zaid bin Al-Arqam, he was asked, "How
many Ghazwat did the Prophet undertake?" Zaid replied, "Nineteen." They
said, "In how many Ghazwat did you join him?" He replied, "Seventeen." I
asked, "Which of these was the first?" He replied, "Al-'Ashira or Al-'Ashiru."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 286:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud:
From Sad bin Mu'adh: Sad bin Mu'adh was an intimate friend of Umaiya bin
Khalaf and whenever Umaiya passed through Medina, he used to stay with
Sad, and whenever Sad went to Mecca, he used to stay with Umaiya. When
Allah's Apostle arrived at Medina, Sa'd went to perform 'Umra and stayed at
Umaiya's home in Mecca. He said to Umaiya, "Tell me of a time when (the
Mosque) is empty so that I may be able to perform Tawaf around the
Ka'ba." So Umaiya went with him about midday. Abu Jahl met them and
said, "O Abu Safwan! Who is this man accompanying you?" He said, "He is
Sad." Abu Jahl addressed Sad saying, "I see you wandering about safely in
Mecca inspite of the fact that you have given shelter to the people who
have changed their religion (i.e. became Muslims) and have claimed that you
will help them and support them. By Allah, if you were not in the company
of Abu Safwan, you would not be able to go your family safely." Sad, raising
his voice, said to him, "By Allah, if you should stop me from doing this (i.e.
performing Tawaf) I would certainly prevent you from something which is
more valuable for you, that is, your passage through Medina." On this,
Umaiya said to him, "O Sad do not raise your voice before Abu-l-Hakam, the
chief of the people of the Valley (of Mecca)." Sad said, "O Umaiya, stop that!
By Allah, I have heard Allah's Apostle predicting that the Muslim will kill
you." Umaiya asked, "In Mecca?" Sad said, "I do not know." Umaiya was
greatly scared by that news.
When Umaiya returned to his family, he said to his wife, "O Um Safwan!
Don't you know what Sad told me? "She said, "What has he told you?" He
replied, "He claims that Muhammad has informed them (i.e. companions
that they will kill me. I asked him, 'In Mecca?' He replied, 'I do not know."
Then Umaiya added, "By Allah, I will never go out of Mecca." But when the
day of (the Ghazwa of) Badr came, Abu Jahl called the people to war, saying,
"Go and protect your caravan." But Umaiya disliked to go out (of Mecca).
Abu Jahl came to him and said, "O Abu Safwan! If the people see you staying
behind though you are the chief of the people of the Valley, then they will
remain behind with you." Abu Jahl kept on urging him to go until he (i.e.
Umaiya) said, "As you have forced me to change my mind, by Allah, I will buy
the best camel in Mecca. Then Umaiya said (to his wife). "O Um Safwan,
prepare what I need (for the journey)." She said to him, "O Abu Safwan!
Have you forgotten what your Yathribi brother told you?" He said, "No, but I
do not want to go with them but for a short distance." So when Umaiya
went out, he used to tie his camel wherever he camped. He kept on doing
that till Allah caused him to be killed at Badr.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 287:
Narrated Kab bin Malik:
I never failed to join Allah's Apostle in any of his Ghazawat except in the
Ghazwa of Tabuk. However, I did not take part in the Ghazwa of Badr, but
none who failed to take part in it, was blamed, for Allah's Apostle had gone
out to meet the caravans of (Quraish, but Allah caused them (i.e. Muslims)
to meet their enemy unexpectedly (with no previous intention) .

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 288:
Narrated Ibn Masud:
I witnessed Al-Miqdad bin Al-Aswad in a scene which would have been
dearer to me than anything had I been the hero of that scene. He (i.e. AlMiqdad) came to the Prophet while the Prophet was urging the Muslims to
fight with the pagans. Al-Miqdad said, "We will not say as the People of
Moses said: Go you and your Lord and fight you two. (5.27). But we shall
fight on your right and on your left and in front of you and behind you." I
saw the face of the Prophet getting bright with happiness, for that saying
delighted him.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 289:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
On the day of the battle of Badr, the Prophet said, "O Allah! I appeal to You
(to fulfill) Your Covenant and Promise. O Allah! If Your Will is that none
should worship You (then give victory to the pagans)." Then Abu Bakr took
hold of him by the hand and said, "This is sufficient for you." The Prophet
came out saying, "Their multitude will be put to flight and they will show
their backs." (54.45)

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 290:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The believers who failed to join the Ghazwa of Badr and those who took
part in it are not equal (in reward).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 291:
Narrated Al-Bara:
I and Ibn 'Umar were considered too young to take part in the battle of
Badr.
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 292:
Narrated Al-Bara:
I and Ibn 'Umar were considered too young (to take part) in the battle of
Badr, and the number of the Emigrant warriors were over sixty (men) and
the Ansar were over 249.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 293:
Narrated Al-Bara:
The companions of (the Prophet) Muhammad who took part in Badr, told
me that their number was that of Saul's (i.e. Talut's) companions who
crossed the river (of Jordan) with him and they were over three-hundredand-ten men. By Allah, none crossed the river with him but a believer. (See
Qur'an 2:249)

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 294:
Narrated Al-Bara:
We, the Companions of Muhammad used to say that the number of the
warriors of Badr was the same as the number of Saul's companions who
crossed the river (of Jordan) with him, and none crossed the river with him
but a believer, and the were over three-hundred-and-ten men.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 295:
Narrated Al-Bara:
As below (Hadith 295).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 296:
Narrated Al-Bara:
We used to say that the warriors of Badr were over three-hundred-and-ten,
as many as the Companions of Saul who crossed the river with him; and
none crossed the river with him but a believer.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 297:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud:
The Prophet faced the Ka'ba and invoked evil on some people of Quraish, on
Shaiba bin Rabi'a, 'Utba bin Rabi'a, Al-Walid bin 'Utba and Abu Jahl bin
Hisham. I bear witness, by Allah, that I saw them all dead, putrefied by the
sun as that day was a very hot day.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 298:
Narrated Abdullah: That he came across Abu Jahl while he was on the point
of death on the day of Badr. Abu Jahl said, "You should not be proud that
you have killed me nor I am ashamed of being killed by my own folk."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 299:
Narrated Anas:
As below (Hadith 300).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 300:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "Who will go and see what has happened to Abu Jahl?"
Ibn Mas'ud went and found that the two sons of 'Afra had struck him fatally
(and he was in his last breaths). 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said, "Are you Abu
Jahl?" And took him by the beard. Abu Jahl said, "Can there be a man
superior to one you have killed or one whom his own folk have killed?"

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 301:
Narrated Anas:
On the day of Badr, the Prophet said, "Who will go and see what has
happened to Abu Jahl?" Ibn Mas'ud went and found that the two sons of
'Afra had struck him fatally. 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud got hold of his beard and
said, "'Are you Abu Jahl?" He replied, "Can there be a man more superior to
one whom his own folk have killed (or you have killed)?"

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 302:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
(as above Hadith 301).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 303:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf:
(the grandfather of Salih bin Ibrahim) the story of Badr, namely, the
narration regarding the sons of 'Afra'.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 304:
Narrated Abu Mijlaz:
From Qais bin Ubad: 'Ali bin Abi Talib said, "I shall be the first man to kneel
down before (Allah), the Beneficent to receive His judgment on the day of
Resurrection (in my favor)." Qais bin Ubad also said, "The following Verse
was revealed in their connection:--
"These two opponents believers and disbelievers) Dispute with each other
About their Lord." (22.19) Qais said that they were those who fought on the
day of Badr, namely, Hamza, 'Ali, 'Ubaida or Abu 'Ubaida bin Al-Harith,
Shaiba bin Rabi'a, 'Utba and Al-Wahd bin Utba.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 305:
Narrated Abu Dhar:
The following Holy Verse:-"These two opponents (believers & disbelievers) dispute with each other
about their Lord," (22.19) was revealed concerning six men from Quraish,
namely, 'Ali, Hamza, 'Ubaida bin Al-Harith; Shaiba bin Rabi'a, 'Utba bin Rabi'a
and Al-Walid bin 'Utba.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 306:
Narrated 'Ali:
The following Holy Verse:-- "These two opponents (believers and
disbelievers) dispute with each other about their Lord." (22.19) was revealed
concerning us.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 307:
Narrated Qais bin Ubad:
I heard Abu Dhar swearing that these Holy Verses were revealed in
connection with those six persons on the day of Badr.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 308:
Narrated Qais:
I heard Abu Dhar swearing that the following Holy verse:-- "These two
opponents (believers and disbelievers) disputing with each other about
their Lord," (22.19) was revealed concerning those men who fought on the
day of Badr, namely, Hamza, 'Ali, Ubaida bin Al-Harith, Utba and Shaiba----the
two sons of Rabi'a-- and Al-Walid bin 'Utba.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 309:
Narrated Abu Ishaq:
A man asked Al-Bara' and I was listening, "Did 'Ali take part in (the battle of)
Badr?" Al-Bara' said, "(Yes). he even met (his enemies) in a duel and was clad
in two armors (one over the other),"

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 310:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf:
"I had an agreement with Umaiya bin Khalaf (that he would look after my
relatives and property in Mecca, and I would look after his relatives and
property in Medina)." 'Abdur-Rahman then mentioned the killing of Umaiya
and his son on the day of Badr, and Bilal said, "Woe to me if Umaiya remains
safe (i.e. alive) . "

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 311:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet recited Surat-an-Najm and then prostrated himself, and all who
were with him prostrated too. But an old man took a handful of dust and
touched his forehead with it saying, "This is sufficient for me." Later on I saw
him killed as an infidel.
Narrated 'Urwa (the son of Az- Zubair): Az-Zubair had three scars caused by
the sword, one of which was over his shoulder and I used to insert my
fingers in it. He received two of those wounds on the day of Badr and one
on the day of Al-Yarmuk. When 'Abdullah bin Zubair was killed, 'Abdul-Malik
bin Marwan said to me, "O 'Urwa, do you recognize the sword of AzZubair?" I said, "Yes." He said, "What marks does it have?" I replied, "It has a
dent in its sharp edge which was caused in it on the day of Badr." 'AbdulMalik said, "You are right! (i.e. their swords) have dents because of clashing
with the regiments of the enemies Then 'Abdul-Malik returned that sword to
me (i.e. Urwa). (Hisham, 'Urwa's son said, "We estimated the price of the
sword as three-thousand (Dinars) and after that it was taken by one of us
(i.e. the inheritors) and I wish I could have had it.")

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 312:
Narrated Hisham:
That his father said, "The sword of Az-Zubair was decorated with silver."
Hisham added, "The sword of 'Urwa was (also) decorated with silver. "

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 313:
Narrated 'Urwa:
On the day of (the battle) of Al-Yarmuk, the companions of Allah's Apostle
said to Az-Zubair, "Will you attack the enemy so that we shall attack them
with you?" Az-Zubair replied, "If I attack them, you people would not
support me." They said, "No, we will support you." So Az-Zubair attacked
them (i.e. Byzantine) and pierced through their lines, and went beyond them
and none of his companions was with him. Then he returned and the enemy
got hold of the bridle of his (horse) and struck him two blows (with the
sword) on his shoulder. Between these two wounds there was a scar caused
by a blow, he had received on the day of Badr (battle). When I was a child I
used to play with those scars by putting my fingers in them. On that day (my
brother) "Abdullah bin Az-Zubair was also with him and he was ten years
old. Az-Zubair had carried him on a horse and let him to the care of some
men.
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 314:
Narrated Abu Talha:
On the day of Badr, the Prophet ordered that the corpses of twenty four
leaders of Quraish should be thrown into one of the dirty dry wells of Badr.
(It was a habit of the Prophet that whenever he conquered some people, he
used to stay at the battle-field for three nights. So, on the third day of the
battle of Badr, he ordered that his she-camel be saddled, then he set out,
and his companions followed him saying among themselves." "Definitely he
(i.e. the Prophet) is proceeding for some great purpose." When he halted at
the edge of the well, he addressed the corpses of the Quraish infidels by
their names and their fathers' names, "O so-and-so, son of so-and-so and O
so-and-so, son of so-and-so! Would it have pleased you if you had obeyed
Allah and His Apostle? We have found true what our Lord promised us. Have
you too found true what your Lord promised you? "'Umar said, "O Allah's
Apostle! You are speaking to bodies that have no souls!" Allah's Apostle
said, "By Him in Whose Hand Muhammad's soul is, you do not hear, what I
say better than they do." (Qatada said, "Allah brought them to life (again) to
let them hear him, to reprimand them and slight them and take revenge
over them and caused them to feel remorseful and regretful.")

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 315:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
regarding the Statement of Allah:--"Those who have changed Allah's
Blessings for disbelief..." (14.28) The people meant here by Allah, are the
infidels of Quraish. ('Amr, a sub-narrator said, "Those are (the infidels of)
Quraish and Muhammad is Allah's Blessing. Regarding Allah's
Statement:"..and have led their people Into the house of destruction?
(14.29) Ibn 'Abbas said, "It means the Fire they will suffer from (after their
death) on the day of Badr."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 316:
Narrated Hisham's father:
It was mentioned before 'Aisha that Ibn 'Umar attributed the following
statement to the Prophet "The dead person is punished in the grave
because of the crying and lamentation Of his family." On that, 'Aisha said,
"But Allah's Apostle said, 'The dead person is punished for his crimes and
sins while his family cry over him then." She added, "And this is similar to the
statement of Allah's Apostle when he stood by the (edge of the) well which
contained the corpses of the pagans killed at Badr, 'They hear what I say.'
She added, "But he said now they know very well what I used to tell them
was the truth." 'Aisha then recited: 'You cannot make the dead hear.'
(30.52) and 'You cannot make those who are in their Graves, hear you.'
(35.22) that is, when they had taken their places in the (Hell) Fire.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 317:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
The Prophet stood at the well of Badr (which contained the corpses of the
pagans) and said, "Have you found true what your lord promised you?" Then
he further said, "They now hear what I say." This was mentioned before
'Aisha and she said, "But the Prophet said, 'Now they know very well that
what I used to tell them was the truth.' Then she recited (the Holy Verse):-"You cannot make the dead hear... ...till the end of Verse)." (30.52)

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 318:
Narrated Anas:
Haritha was martyred on the day (of the battle) of Badr, and he was a young
boy then. His mother came to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! You
know how dear Haritha is to me. If he is in Paradise, I shall remain patient,
and hope for reward from Allah, but if it is not so, then you shall see what I
do?" He said, "May Allah be merciful to you! Have you lost your senses? Do
you think there is only one Paradise? There are many Paradises and your son
is in the (most superior) Paradise of Al-Firdaus."
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 319:
Narrated 'Ali:
Allah's Apostle sent me, Abu Marthad and Az-Zubair, and all of us were
riding horses, and said, "Go till you reach Raudat-Khakh where there is a
pagan woman carrying a letter from Hatib bin Abi Balta' a to the pagans of
Mecca." So we found her riding her camel at the place which Allah's Apostle
had mentioned. We said (to her),"(Give us) the letter." She said, "I have no
letter." Then we made her camel kneel down and we searched her, but we
found no letter. Then we said, "Allah's Apostle had not told us a lie,
certainly. Take out the letter, otherwise we will strip you naked." When she
saw that we were determined, she put her hand below her waist belt, for
she had tied her cloak round her waist, and she took out the letter, and we
brought her to Allah's Apostle Then 'Umar said, "O Allah's Apostle! (This
Hatib) has betrayed Allah, His Apostle and the believers! Let me cut off his
neck!" The Prophet asked Hatib, "What made you do this?" Hatib said, "By
Allah, I did not intend to give up my belief in Allah and His Apostle but I
wanted to have some influence among the (Mecca) people so that through
it, Allah might protect my family and property. There is none of your
companions but has some of his relatives there through whom Allah
protects his family and property." The Prophet said, "He has spoken the
truth; do no say to him but good." 'Umar said, "He as betrayed Allah, His
Apostle and the faithful believers. Let me cut off his neck!" The Prophet
said, "Is he not one of the Badr warriors? May be Allah looked at the Badr
warriors and said, 'Do whatever you like, as I have granted Paradise to you,
or said, 'I have forgiven you."' On this, tears came out of Umar's eyes, and
he said, "Allah and His Apostle know better."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 320:
Narrated Usaid:
On the day of Badr, Allah's Apostle said to us, "When the enemy comes near
to you, shoot at them but use your arrows sparingly (so that your arrows
should not be wasted)."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 321:
Narrated Abu Usaid:
On the day of (the battle of) Badr, Allah's Apostle said to us, "When your
enemy comes near to you (i.e. overcome you by sheer number), shoot at
them but use your arrows sparingly."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 322:
Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib:
On the day of Uhud the Prophet appointed 'Abdullah bin Jubair as chief of
the archers, and seventy among us were injured and martyred. On the day
(of the battle) of Badr, the Prophet and his companions had inflicted 140
casualties on the pagans, 70 were taken prisoners, and 70 were killed. Abu
Sufyan said, "This is a day of (revenge) for the day of Badr and the issue of
war is undecided ."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 323:
Narrated Abu Musa:
That the Prophet said, "The good is what Allah gave us later on (after Uhud),
and the reward of truthfulness is what Allah gave us after the day (of the
battle) of Badr."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 324:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf:
While I was fighting in the front file on the day (of the battle) of Badr,
suddenly I looked behind and saw on my right and left two young boys and
did not feel safe by standing between them. Then one of them asked me
secretly so that his companion may not hear, "O Uncle! Show me Abu Jahl."
I said, "O nephew! What will you do to him?" He said, "I have promised Allah
that if I see him (i.e. Abu Jahl), I will either kill him or be killed before I kill
him." Then the other said the same to me secretly so that his companion
should not hear. I would not have been pleased to be in between two other
men instead of them. Then I pointed him (i.e. Abu Jahl) out to them. Both of
them attacked him like two hawks till they knocked him down. Those two
boys were the sons of 'Afra' (i.e. an Ansari woman).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 325:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle sent out ten spies under the command of 'Asim bin Thabit AlAnsari, the grand-father of 'Asim bin 'Umar Al-Khattab. When they reached
(a place called) Al-Hadah between 'Usfan and Mecca, their presence was
made known to a sub-tribe of Hudhail called Banu Lihyan. So they sent
about one hundred archers after them. The archers traced the footsteps (of
the Muslims) till they found the traces of dates which they had eaten at one
of their camping places. The archers said, "These dates are of Yathrib (i.e.
Medina)," and went on tracing the Muslims' footsteps. When 'Asim and his
companions became aware of them, they took refuge in a (high) place. But
the enemy encircled them and said, "Come down and surrender. We give
you a solemn promise and covenant that we will not kill anyone of you."
'Asim bin Thabit said, "O people! As for myself, I will never get down to be
under the protection of an infidel. O Allah! Inform your Prophet about us."
So the archers threw their arrows at them and martyred 'Asim. Three of
them came down and surrendered to them, accepting their promise and
covenant and they were Khubaib, Zaid bin Ad-Dathina and another man.
When the archers got hold of them, they untied the strings of the arrow
bows and tied their captives with them. The third man said, "This is the first
proof of treachery! By Allah, I will not go with you for I follow the example
of these." He meant the martyred companions. The archers dragged him
and struggled with him (till they martyred him). Then Khubaib and Zaid bin
Ad-Dathina were taken away by them and later on they sold them as slaves
in Mecca after the event of the Badr battle.
The sons of Al-Harit bin 'Amr bin Naufal bought Khubaib for he was a person
who had killed (their father) Al-Hari bin 'Amr on the day (of the battle) of
Badr. Khubaib remained imprisoned by them till they decided unanimously
to kill him. One day Khubaib borrowed from a daughter of Al-Harith, a razor
for shaving his public hair, and she lent it to him. By chance, while she was
inattentive, a little son of hers went to him (i.e. Khubaib) and she saw that
Khubaib had seated him on his thigh while the razor was in his hand. She
was so much terrified that Khubaib noticed her fear and said, "Are you afraid
that I will kill him? Never would I do such a thing." Later on (while narrating
the story) she said, "By Allah, I had never seen a better captive than
Khubaib. By Allah, one day I saw him eating from a bunch of grapes in his
hand while he was fettered with iron chains and (at that time) there was no
fruit in Mecca." She used to say," It was food Allah had provided Khubaib
with."
When they took him to Al-Hil out of Mecca sanctuary to martyr him, Khubaib
requested them. "Allow me to offer a two-Rak'at prayer." They allowed him
and he prayed two Rakat and then said, "By Allah! Had I not been afraid that
you would think I was worried, I would have prayed more." Then he
(invoked evil upon them) saying, "O Allah! Count them and kill them one by
one, and do not leave anyone of them"' Then he recited: "As I am martyred
as a Muslim, I do not care in what way I receive my death for Allah's Sake,
for this is for the Cause of Allah. If He wishes, He will bless the cut limbs of
my body." Then Abu Sarva, 'Ubqa bin Al-Harith went up to him and killed
him. It was Khubaib who set the tradition of praying for any Muslim to be
martyred in captivity (before he is executed). The Prophet told his
companions of what had happened (to those ten spies) on the same day
they were martyred. Some Quraish people, being informed of 'Asim bin
Thabit's death, sent some messengers to bring a part of his body so that his
death might be known for certain, for he had previously killed one of their
leaders (in the battle of Badr). But Allah sent a swarm of wasps to protect
the dead body of 'Asim, and they shielded him from the messengers who
could not cut anything from his body.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 326:
Narrated Nafi:
Ibn 'Umar was once told that Said bin Zaid bin 'Amr bin Nufail, one of the
Badr warriors, had fallen ill on a Friday. Ibn 'Umar rode to him late in the
forenoon. The time of the Friday prayer approached and Ibn 'Umar did not
take part in the Friday prayer.
Narrated Subaia bint Al-Harith: That she was married to Sad bin Khaula who
was from the tribe of Bani 'Amr bin Luai, and was one of those who fought
the Badr battle. He died while she wa pregnant during Hajjat-ul-Wada.' Soon
after his death, she gave birth to a child. When she completed the term of
deliver (i.e. became clean), she prepared herself for suitors. Abu As-Sanabil
bin Bu'kak, a man from the tribe of Bani Abd-ud-Dal called on her and said to
her, "What! I see you dressed up for the people to ask you in marriage. Do
you want to marry By Allah, you are not allowed to marry unless four
months and ten days have elapsed (after your husband's death)." Subai'a in
her narration said, "When he (i.e. Abu As-Sanabil) said this to me. I put on
my dress in the evening and went to Allah's Apostle and asked him about
this problem. He gave the verdict that I was free to marry as I had already
given birth to my child and ordered me to marry if I wished."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 327:
Narrated Rifaa:
(who was one of the Badr warriors) Gabriel came to the Prophet and said,
"How do you look upon the warriors of Badr among yourselves?" The
Prophet said, "As the best of the Muslims." or said a similar statement. On
that, Gabriel said, "And so are the Angels who participated in the Badr
(battle)."
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 328:
Narrated Mu'adh bin Rifa'a bin Rafi:
Rifa'a was one of the warriors of Badr while (his father) Rafi' was one of the
people of Al-'Aqaba (i.e. those who gave the pledge of allegiance at Al'Aqaba). Rafi' used to say to his son, "I would not have been happier if I had
taken part in the Badr battle instead of taking part in the 'Aqaba pledge."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 329:
Narrated Mu'adh:
The one who asked (the Prophet) was Gabriel.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 330:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said on the day (of the battle) of Badr, "This is Gabriel holding
the head of his horse and equipped with arms for the battle.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 331:
Narrated Anas:
Abu Zaid died and did not leave any offspring, and he was one of the Badr
warriors.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 332:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Abu Said bin Malik Al-Khudri returned from a journey and his family offered
him some meat of sacrifices offered at 'Id ul Adha. On that he said, "I will not
eat it before asking (whether it is allowed)." He went to his maternal
brother, Qatada bin N i 'man, who was one of the Badr warriors, and asked
him about it. Qatada said, "After your departure, an order was issued by the
Prophet cancelling the prohibition of eating sacrifices after three days."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 333:
Narrated 'Urwa:
Az-Zubair said, "I met Ubaida bin Said bin Al-As on the day (of the battle) of
Badr and he was covered with armor; so much that only his eyes were
visible. He was surnamed Abu Dhat-al-Karish. He said (proudly), 'I am Abu-alKarish.' I attacked him with the spear and pierced his eye and he died. I put
my foot over his body to pull (that spear) out, but even then I had to use a
great force to take it out as its both ends were bent." 'Urwa said, "Later on
Allah's Apostle asked Az-Zubair for the spear and he gave it to him. When
Allah's Apostle died, Az-Zubair took it back. After that Abu Bakr demanded it
and he gave it to him, and when Abu Bakr died, Az-Zubair took it back.
'Umar then demanded it from him and he gave it to him. When 'Umar died,
Az-Zubair took it back, and then 'Uthman demanded it from him and he gave
it to him. When 'Uthman was martyred, the spear remained with Ali's
offspring. Then 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair demanded it back, and it remained
with him till he was martyred.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 334:
Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit:
(who was one of the Badr warriors) Allah's Apostle said, "Give me the
pledge of allegiance."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 335:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) Abu Hudhaifa, one of those who fought the battle
of Badr, with Allah's Apostle adopted Salim as his son and married his niece
Hind bint Al-Wahd bin 'Utba to him' and Salim was a freed slave of an Ansari
woman. Allah's Apostle also adopted Zaid as his son. In the Pre-lslamic
period of ignorance the custom was that, if one adopted a son, the people
would call him by the name of the adopted-father whom he would inherit as
well, till Allah revealed: "Call them (adopted sons) By (the names of) their
fathers." (33.5)

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 336:
Narrated Ar-Rubai bint Muauwidh:
The Prophet came to me after consuming his marriage with me and sat
down on my bed as you (the sub-narrator) are sitting now, and small girls
were beating the tambourine and singing in lamentation of my father who
had been killed on the day of the battle of Badr. Then one of the girls said,
"There is a Prophet amongst us who knows what will happen tomorrow."
The Prophet said (to her)," Do not say this, but go on saying what you have
spoken before."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 337:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
As below (Hadith 338).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 338:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Abu Talha, a companion of Allah's Apostle and one of those who fought at
Badr together with Allah's Apostle told me that Allah's Apostle said. "Angels
do not enter a house in which there is a dog or a picture" He meant the
images of creatures that have souls.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 339:
Narrated 'Ali:
as below (Hadith 340).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 340:
Narrated 'Ali:
I had a she-camel which I got in my share from the booty of the battle of
Badr, and the Prophet had given me another she camel from the Khumus
which Allah had bestowed on him that day. And when I intended to
celebrate my marriage to Fatima, the daughter of the Prophet, I made an
arrangement with a goldsmith from Bani Qainuqa 'that he should go with
me to bring Idhkhir (i.e. a kind of grass used by gold-smiths) which I
intended to sell to gold-smiths in order to spend its price on the marriage
banquet. While I was collecting ropes and sacks of pack saddles for my two
she-camels which were kneeling down beside an Ansari's dwelling and after
collecting what I needed, I suddenly found that the humps of the two shecamels had been cut off and their flanks had been cut open and portions of
their livers had been taken out. On seeing that, I could not help weeping. I
asked, "Who has done that?" They (i.e. the people) said, "Hamza bin 'Abdul
Muttalib has done it. He is present in this house with some Ansari drinkers, a
girl singer, and his friends. The singer said in her song, "O Hamza, get at the
fat she-camels!" On hearing this, Hamza rushed to his sword and cut of the
camels' humps and cut their flanks open and took out portions from their
livers." Then I came to the Prophet, with whom Zaid bin Haritha was
present. The Prophet noticed my state and asked, "What is the matter?" I
said, "O Allah's Apostle, I have never experienced such a day as today!
Hamza attacked my two she-camels, cut off their humps and cut their flanks
open, and he is still present in a house along some drinkers." The Prophet
asked for his cloak, put it on, and proceeded, followed by Zaid bin Haritha
and myself, till he reached the house where Hamza was. He asked the
permission to enter, and he was permitted. The Prophet started blaming
Hamza for what he had done. Hamza was drunk and his eyes were red. He
looked at the Prophet then raised his eyes to look at his knees and raised his
eves more to look at his face and then said, "You are not but my father's
slaves." When the Prophet understood that Hamza was drunk, he retreated,
walking backwards went out and we left with him.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 341:
Narrated Ibn Maqal:
'Ali led the funeral prayer of Sahl bin Hunaif and said, "He was one of the
warriors of Badr."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 342:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Umar bin Al-Khattab said, "When (my daughter) Hafsa bint 'Umar lost her
husband Khunais bin Hudhaifa As-Sahrni who was one of the companions of
Allah's Apostle and had fought in the battle of Badr and had died in Medina,
I met 'Uthman bin 'Affan and suggested that he should marry Hafsa saying,
"If you wish, I will marry Hafsa bint 'Umar to you,' on that, he said, 'I will
think it over.' I waited for a few days and then he said to me. 'I am of the
opinion that I shall not marry at present.' Then I met Abu Bakr and said, 'if
you wish, I will marry you, Hafsa bint 'Umar.' He kept quiet and did not give
me any reply and I became more angry with him than I was with Uthman .
Some days later, Allah's Apostle demanded her hand in marriage and I
married her to him. Later on Abu Bakr met me and said, "Perhaps you were
angry with me when you offered me Hafsa for marriage and I gave no reply
to you?' I said, 'Yes.' Abu Bakr said, 'Nothing prevented me from accepting
your offer except that I learnt that Allah's Apostle had referred to the issue
of Hafsa and I did not want to disclose the secret of Allah's Apostle , but had
he (i.e. the Prophet) given her up I would surely have accepted her."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 343:
Narrated Abu Masud Al-Badri:
The Prophet said, "A man's spending on his family is a deed of charity."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 344:
Narrated Az-Zuhri:
I heard 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair talking to 'Umar bin 'Abdul 'Aziz during the
latter's Governorship (at Medina), he said, "Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba delayed
the 'Asr prayer when he was the ruler of Al-Kufa. On that, Abu Mas'ud.
'Uqba bin 'Amr Al-Ansari, the grand-father of Zaid bin Hasan, who was one
of the Badr warriors, came in and said, (to Al-Mughira), 'You know that
Gabriel came down and offered the prayer and Allah's Apostle prayed five
prescribed prayers, and Gabriel said (to the Prophet ), "I have been ordered
to do so (i.e. offer these five prayers at these fixed stated hours of the
day)."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 345:
Narrated Abu Masud Al-Badri:
Allah's Apostle said, "It is sufficient for one to recite the last two Verses of
Surat-al-Baqara at night."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 346:
Narrated Mahmud bin Ar-Rabi:
That 'Itban bin Malik who was one of the companions of the Prophet and
one of the warriors of Badr, came to Allah's Apostle.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 347:
Narrated Ibn Shihab:
I asked Al-Husain bin Muhammad who was one of the sons of Salim and one
of the nobles amongst them, about the narration of Mahmud bin Ar-Rabi
'from 'Itban bin Malik, and he confirmed it.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 348:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Rabi'a:
who was one of the leaders of Bani 'Adi and his father participated in the
battle of Badr in the company of the Prophet. 'Umar appointed Qudama bin
Maz'un as ruler of Bahrain, Qudama was one of the warriors of the battle of
Badr and was the maternal uncle of Abdullah bin 'Umar and Hafsa.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 349:
Narrated Az-Zuhri:
Salim bin 'Abdullah told me that Rafi' bin Khadij told 'Abdullah bin 'Umar
that his two paternal uncles who had fought in the battle of Badr informed
him that Allah's Apostle forbade the renting of fields. I said to Salim, "Do
you rent your land?" He said, "Yes, for Rafi' is mistaken."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 350:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Shaddad bin Al-Had Al-Laithi:
I saw Rifa'a bin Rafi Al-Ansari who was a Badr warrior.
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 351:
Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:
That 'Amr bin Auf, who was an ally of Bani 'Amir bin Luai and one of those
who fought at Badr in the company of the Prophet , said, "Allah's Apostle
sent Abu 'Ubaida bin Al-Jarrah to Bahrain to bring the Jizya taxation from its
people, for Allah's Apostle had made a peace treaty with the people of
Bahrain and appointed Al-'Ala' bin Al-Hadrami as their ruler. So, Abu 'Ubaida
arrived with the money from Bahrain. When the Ansar heard of the arrival of
Abu 'Ubaida (on the next day) they offered the morning prayer with the
Prophet and when the morning prayer had finished, they presented
themselves before him. On seeing the Ansar, Allah's Apostle smiled and said,
"I think you have heard that Abu 'Ubaida has brought something?" They
replied, "Indeed, it is so, O Allah's Apostle!" He said, "Be happy, and hope
for what will please you. By Allah, I am not afraid that you will be poor, but I
fear that worldly wealth will be bestowed upon you as it was bestowed
upon those who lived before you. So you will compete amongst yourselves
for it, as they competed for it and it will destroy you as it did them."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 352:
Narrated Nafi: Ibn 'Umar used to kill all kinds of snakes until Abu Lubaba AlBadri told him that the Prophet had forbidden the killing of harmless snakes
living in houses and called Jinan. So Ibn 'Umar gave up killing them.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 353:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Some men of the Ansar requested Allah's Apostle to allow them to see him,
they said, "Allow us to forgive the ransom of our sister's son, 'Abbas." The
Prophet said, "By Allah, you will not leave a single Dirham of it!"
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 354:
Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin 'Adi bin Al-Khiyar:
That Al-Miqdad bin 'Amr Al-Kindi, who was an ally of Bani Zuhra and one of
those who fought the battle of Badr together with Allah's Apostle told him
that he said to Allah's Apostle, "Suppose I met one of the infidels and we
fought, and he struck one of my hands with his sword and cut it off and then
took refuge in a tree and said, "I surrender to Allah (i.e. I have become a
Muslim),' could I kill him, O Allah's Apostle, after he had said this?" Allah's
Apostle said, "You should not kill him." Al-Miqdad said, "O Allah's Apostle!
But he had cut off one of my two hands, and then he had uttered those
words?" Allah's Apostle replied, "You should not kill him, for if you kill him,
he would be in your position where you had been before killing him, and you
would be in his position where he had been before uttering those words."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 355:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle said on the day of Badr, "Who will go and see what has
happened to Abu Jahl?" Ibn Mas'ud went and saw him struck by the two
sons of 'Afra and was on the point of death . Ibn Mas'ud said, "Are you Abu
Jahl?" Abu Jahl replied, "Can there be a man more superior to the one whom
you have killed (or as Sulaiman said, or his own folk have killed.)?" Abu Jahl
added, "Would that I had been killed by other than a mere farmer. "

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 356:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
'Umar said, "When the Prophet died I said to Abu Bakr, 'Let us go to our
Ansari brethren.' We met two pious men from them, who had fought in the
battle of Badr." When I mentioned this to Urwa bin Az-Zubair, he said,
"Those two pious men were 'Uwaim bin Sa'ida and Manbin Adi."
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 357:
Narrated Qais:
The Badr warriors were given five thousand (Dirhams) each, yearly. 'Umar
said, "I will surely give them more than what I will give to others."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 358:
Narrated Jubair bin Mut'im:
I heard the Prophet reciting Surat-at-Tur in Maghrib prayer, and that was at
a time when belief was first planted in my heart. The Prophet while speaking
about the war prisoners of Badr, said, "Were Al-Mutim bin Adi alive and
interceded with me for these filthy people, I would definitely forgive them
for his sake."
Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab: When the first civil strife (in Islam) took place
because of the murder of 'Uthman, it left none of the Badr warriors alive.
When the second civil strife, that is the battle of Al-Harra, took place, it left
none of the Hudaibiya treaty companions alive. Then the third civil strife
took place and it did not subside till it had exhausted all the strength of the
people.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 359:
Narrated Yunus bin Yazid:
I heard Az-Zuhri saying, "I heard 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair. Said bin Al-Musaiyab,
'Alqama bin Waqqas and 'Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah each narrating part of the
narrative concerning 'Aisha the wife of the Prophet. 'Aisha said: When I and
Um Mistah were returning, Um Mistah stumbled by treading on the end of
her robe, and on that she said, 'May Mistah be ruined.' I said, 'You have said
a bad thing, you curse a man who took part in the battle of Badr!." Az-Zuhri
then narrated the narration of the Lie (forged against 'Aisha).
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 360:
Narrated Ibn Shihab:
These were the battles of Allah's Apostle (which he fought), and while
mentioning (the Badr battle) he said, "While the corpses of the pagans were
being thrown into the well, Allah's Apostle said (to them), 'Have you found
what your Lord promised true?" 'Abdullah said, "Some of the Prophet's
companions said, "O Allah's Apostle! You are addressing dead people.'
Allah's Apostle replied, 'You do not hear what I am saying, better than they.'
The total number of Muslim fighters from Quraish who fought in the battle
of Badr and were given their share of the booty, were 81 men." Az-Zubair
said, "When their shares were distributed, their number was 101 men. But
Allah knows it better."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 361:
Narrated Az-Zubair:
On the day of Badr, (Quraishi) Emigrants received 100 shares of the war
booty."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 362:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
Bani An-Nadir and Bani Quraiza fought (against the Prophet violating their
peace treaty), so the Prophet exiled Bani An-Nadir and allowed Bani Quraiza
to remain at their places (in Medina) taking nothing from them till they
fought against the Prophet again) . He then killed their men and distributed
their women, children and property among the Muslims, but some of them
came to the Prophet and he granted them safety, and they embraced Islam.
He exiled all the Jews from Medina. They were the Jews of Bani Qainuqa',
the tribe of 'Abdullah bin Salam and the Jews of Bani Haritha and all the
other Jews of Medina.
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 363:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
I mentioned to Ibn 'Abbas Surat-Hashr. He said, "Call it Surat-an-Nadir."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 364:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Some people used to allot some date palm trees to the Prophet as gift till he
conquered Banu Quraiza and Bani An-Nadir, where upon he started
returning their date palms to them.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 365:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
Allah's Apostle had the date-palm trees of Bani Al-Nadir burnt and cut down
at a place called Al-Buwaira. Allah then revealed: "What you cut down of the
date-palm trees (of the enemy) Or you left them standing on their stems. It
was by Allah's Permission." (59.5)

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 366:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
The Prophet burnt the date-palm trees of Bani An-Nadir. Hassan bin Thabit
said the following poetic Verses about this event:-- "the terrible burning of
Al-Buwaira Has been received indifferently By the nobles of Bani Luai (The
masters and nobles of Quraish)." Abu Sufyan bin Al-Harith (i.e. the Prophet's
cousin who was still a disbeliever then) replied to Hassan, saying in poetic
verses:-- "May Allah bless that burning And set all its (i.e. Medina's) Parts on
burning fire. You will see who is far from it (i.e. Al-Buwaira) And which of our
lands will be Harmed by it (i.e. the burning of Al-Buwaira)."
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 367:
Narrated Malik bin Aus Al-Hadathan An-Nasri:
That once 'Umar bin Al-Khattab called him and while he was sitting with him,
his gatekeeper, Yarfa came and said, "Will you admit 'Uthman, 'AbdurRahman bin Auf, AzZubair and Sad (bin Abi Waqqas) who are waiting for
your permission?" 'Umar said, "Yes, let them come in." After a while, Yarfacame again and said, "Will you admit 'Ali and 'Abbas who are asking your
permission?" 'Umar said, "Yes." So, when the two entered, 'Abbas said, "O
chief of the believers! Judge between me and this (i.e. 'Ali). "Both of them
had a dispute regarding the property of Bani An-Nadir which Allah had given
to His Apostle as Fai (i.e. booty gained without fighting), 'Ali and 'Abbas
started reproaching each other. The (present) people (i.e. 'Uthman and his
companions) said, "O chief of the believers! Give your verdict in their case
and relieve each from) the other." 'Umar said, "Wait I beseech you, by Allah,
by Whose Permission both the heaven and the earth stand fast! Do you
know that Allah's Apostle said, 'We (Prophets) our properties are not to be
inherited, and whatever we leave, is to be spent in charity,' and he said it
about himself?" They (i.e. 'Uthman and his company) said, "He did say it.
"'Umar then turned towards 'Ali and 'Abbas and said, "I beseech you both,
by Allah! Do you know that Allah's Apostle said this?" They replied in the
affirmative. He said, "Now I am talking to you about this matter. Allah the
Glorified favored His Apostle with something of this Fai (i.e. booty won
without fighting) which He did not give to anybody else. Allah said:-"And what Allah gave to His Apostle ("Fai"" Booty) from them--For which
you made no expedition With either Calvary or camelry. But Allah gives
power to His Apostles Over whomsoever He will And Allah is able to do all
things." (59.6)
So this property was especially granted to Allah's Apostle . But by Allah, the
Prophet neither took it all for himself only, nor deprived you of it, but he
gave it to all of you and distributed it amongst you till only this remained out
of it. And from this Allah's Apostle used to spend the yearly maintenance for
his family, and whatever used to remain, he used to spend it where Allah's
Property is spent (i.e. in charity), Allah's Apostle kept on acting like that
during all his life, Then he died, and Abu Bakr said, 'I am the successor of
Allah's Apostle.' So he (i.e. Abu Bakr) took charge of this property and
disposed of it in the same manner as Allah's Apostle used to do, and all of
you (at that time) knew all about it." Then 'Umar turned towards 'Ali and
'Abbas and said, "You both remember that Abu Bakr disposed of it in the
way you have described and Allah knows that, in that matter, he was
sincere, pious, rightly guided and the follower of the right. Then Allah
caused Abu Bakr to die and I said, 'I am the successor of Allah's Apostle and
Abu Bakr.' So I kept this property in my possession for the first two years of
my rule (i.e. Caliphate and I used to dispose of it in the same wa as Allah's
Apostle and Abu Bakr used to do; and Allah knows that I have been sincere,
pious, rightly guided an the follower of the right (in this matte Later on both
of you (i.e. 'Ali and Abbas) came to me, and the claim of you both was one
and the same, O 'Abbas! You also came to me. So I told you both that Allah's
Apostle said, "Our property is not inherited, but whatever we leave is to be
given in charity.' Then when I thought that I should better hand over this
property to you both or the condition that you will promise and pledge
before Allah that you will dispose it off in the same way as Allah's Apostle
and Abu Bakr did and as I have done since the beginning of my caliphate or
else you should not speak to me (about it).' So, both of you said to me,
'Hand it over to us on this condition.' And on this condition I handed it over
to you. Do you want me now to give a decision other than that (decision)?
By Allah, with Whose Permission both the sky and the earth stand fast, I will
never give any decision other than that (decision) till the Last Hour is
established. But if you are unable to manage it (i.e. that property), then
return it to me, and I will manage on your behalf." The sub-narrator said, "I
told 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair of this Hadith and he said, 'Malik bin Aus has told
the truth" I heard 'Aisha, the wife of the Prophet saying, 'The wives of the
Prophet sent 'Uthman to Abu Bakr demanding from him their 1/8 of the Fai
which Allah had granted to his Apostle. But I used to oppose them and say
to them: Will you not fear Allah? Don't you know that the Prophet used to
say: Our property is not inherited, but whatever we leave is to be given in
charity? The Prophet mentioned that regarding himself. He added: 'The
family of Muhammad can take their sustenance from this property. So the
wives of the Prophet stopped demanding it when I told them of that.' So,
this property (of Sadaqa) was in the hands of Ali who withheld it from
'Abbas and overpowered him. Then it came in the hands of Hasan bin 'Ali,
then in the hands of Husain bin 'Ali, and then in the hands of Ali bin Husain
and Hasan bin Hasan, and each of the last two used to manage it in turn,
then it came in the hands of Zaid bin Hasan, and it was truly the Sadaqa of
Allah's Apostle ."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 368:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Fatima and Al'Abbas came to Abu Bakr, claiming their inheritance of the
Prophet's land of Fadak and his share from Khaibar. Abu Bakr said, "I heard
the Prophet saying, 'Our property is not inherited, and whatever we leave is
to be given in charity. But the family of Muhammad can take their
sustenance from this property.' By Allah, I would love to do good to the Kith
and kin of Allah's Apostle rather than to my own Kith and kin."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 369:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "Who is willing to kill Ka'b bin Al-Ashraf who has hurt
Allah and His Apostle?" Thereupon Muhammad bin Maslama got up saying,
"O Allah's Apostle! Would you like that I kill him?" The Prophet said, "Yes,"
Muhammad bin Maslama said, "Then allow me to say a (false) thing (i.e. to
deceive Kab). "The Prophet said, "You may say it." Then Muhammad bin
Maslama went to Kab and said, "That man (i.e. Muhammad demands
Sadaqa (i.e. Zakat) from us, and he has troubled us, and I have come to
borrow something from you." On that, Kab said, "By Allah, you will get tired
of him!" Muhammad bin Maslama said, "Now as we have followed him, we
do not want to leave him unless and until we see how his end is going to be.
Now we want you to lend us a camel load or two of food." (Some difference
between narrators about a camel load or two.) Kab said, "Yes, (I will lend
you), but you should mortgage something to me." Muhammad bin Mas-
lama and his companion said, "What do you want?" Ka'b replied, "Mortgage
your women to me." They said, "How can we mortgage our women to you
and you are the most handsome of the 'Arabs?" Ka'b said, "Then mortgage
your sons to me." They said, "How can we mortgage our sons to you? Later
they would be abused by the people's saying that so-and-so has been
mortgaged for a camel load of food. That would cause us great disgrace, but
we will mortgage our arms to you." Muhammad bin Maslama and his
companion promised Kab that Muhammad would return to him. He came to
Kab at night along with Kab's foster brother, Abu Na'ila. Kab invited them to
come into his fort, and then he went down to them. His wife asked him,
"Where are you going at this time?" Kab replied, "None but Muhammad bin
Maslama and my (foster) brother Abu Na'ila have come." His wife said, "I
hear a voice as if dropping blood is from him, Ka'b said. "They are none but
my brother Muhammad bin Maslama and my foster brother Abu Naila. A
generous man should respond to a call at night even if invited to be killed."
Muhammad bin Maslama went with two men. (Some narrators mention the
men as 'Abu bin Jabr. Al Harith bin Aus and Abbad bin Bishr). So Muhammad
bin Maslama went in together with two men, and sail to them, "When Ka'b
comes, I will touch his hair and smell it, and when you see that I have got
hold of his head, strip him. I will let you smell his head." Kab bin Al-Ashraf
came down to them wrapped in his clothes, and diffusing perfume.
Muhammad bin Maslama said. " have never smelt a better scent than this.
Ka'b replied. "I have got the best 'Arab women who know how to use the
high class of perfume." Muhammad bin Maslama requested Ka'b "Will you
allow me to smell your head?" Ka'b said, "Yes." Muhammad smelt it and
made his companions smell it as well. Then he requested Ka'b again, "Will
you let me (smell your head)?" Ka'b said, "Yes." When Muhammad got a
strong hold of him, he said (to his companions), "Get at him!" So they killed
him and went to the Prophet and informed him. (Abu Rafi) was killed after
Ka'b bin Al-Ashraf."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 370:
Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib:
Allah's Apostle sent a group of persons to Abu Rafi. Abdullah bin Atik
entered his house at night, while he was sleeping, and killed him.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 371:
Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib:
Allah's Apostle sent some men from the Ansar to ((kill) Abu Rafi, the Jew,
and appointed 'Abdullah bin Atik as their leader. Abu Rafi used to hurt
Allah's Apostle and help his enemies against him. He lived in his castle in the
land of Hijaz. When those men approached (the castle) after the sun had set
and the people had brought back their livestock to their homes. Abdullah
(bin Atik) said to his companions, "Sit down at your places. I am going, and I
will try to play a trick on the gate-keeper so that I may enter (the castle)." So
'Abdullah proceeded towards the castle, and when he approached the gate,
he covered himself with his clothes, pretending to answer the call of nature.
The people had gone in, and the gate-keeper (considered 'Abdullah as one
of the castle's servants) addressing him saying, "O Allah's Servant! Enter if
you wish, for I want to close the gate." 'Abdullah added in his story, "So I
went in (the castle) and hid myself. When the people got inside, the gatekeeper closed the gate and hung the keys on a fixed wooden peg. I got up
and took the keys and opened the gate. Some people were staying late at
night with Abu Rafi for a pleasant night chat in a room of his. When his
companions of nightly entertainment went away, I ascended to him, and
whenever I opened a door, I closed it from inside. I said to myself, 'Should
these people discover my presence, they will not be able to catch me till I
have killed him.' So I reached him and found him sleeping in a dark house
amidst his family, I could not recognize his location in the house. So I
shouted, 'O Abu Rafi!' Abu Rafi said, 'Who is it?' I proceeded towards the
source of the voice and hit him with the sword, and because of my
perplexity, I could not kill him. He cried loudly, and I came out of the house
and waited for a while, and then went to him again and said, 'What is this
voice, O Abu Rafi?' He said, 'Woe to your mother! A man in my house has hit
me with a sword! I again hit him severely but I did not kill him. Then I drove
the point of the sword into his belly (and pressed it through) till it touched
his back, and I realized that I have killed him. I then opened the doors one by
one till I reached the staircase, and thinking that I had reached the ground, I
stepped out and fell down and got my leg broken in a moonlit night. I tied
my leg with a turban and proceeded on till I sat at the gate, and said, 'I will
not go out tonight till I know that I have killed him.' So, when (early in the
morning) the cock crowed, the announcer of the casualty stood on the wall
saying, 'I announce the death of Abu Rafi, the merchant of Hijaz. Thereupon
I went to my companions and said, 'Let us save ourselves, for Allah has killed
Abu Rafi,' So I (along with my companions proceeded and) went to the
Prophet and described the whole story to him. "He said, 'Stretch out your
(broken) leg. I stretched it out and he rubbed it and it became All right as if I
had never had any ailment whatsoever."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 372:
Narrated Al-Bara:
Allah's Apostle sent 'Abdullah bin 'Atik and 'Abdullah bin 'Utba with a group
of men to Abu Rafi (to kill him). They proceeded till they approached his
castle, whereupon 'Abdullah bin Atik said to them, "Wait (here), and in the
meantime I will go and see." 'Abdullah said later on, "I played a trick in order
to enter the castle. By chance, they lost a donkey of theirs and came out
carrying a flaming light to search for it. I was afraid that they would
recognize me, so I covered my head and legs and pretended to answer the
call to nature. The gatekeeper called, 'Whoever wants to come in, should
come in before I close the gate.' So I went in and hid myself in a stall of a
donkey near the gate of the castle. They took their supper with Abu Rafi and
had a chat till late at night. Then they went back to their homes. When the
voices vanished and I no longer detected any movement, I came out. I had
seen where the gate-keeper had kept the key of the castle in a hole in the
wall. I took it and unlocked the gate of the castle, saying to myself, 'If these
people should notice me, I will run away easily.' Then I locked all the doors
of their houses from outside while they were inside, and ascended to Abu
Rafi by a staircase. I saw the house in complete darkness with its light off,
and I could not know where the man was. So I called, 'O Abu Rafi!' He
replied, 'Who is it?' I proceeded towards the voice and hit him. He cried
loudly but my blow was futile. Then I came to him, pretending to help him,
saying with a different tone of my voice, ' What is wrong with you, O Abu
Rafi?' He said, 'Are you not surprised? Woe on your mother! A man has come
to me and hit me with a sword!' So again I aimed at him and hit him, but the
blow proved futile again, and on that Abu Rafi cried loudly and his wife got
up. I came again and changed my voice as if I were a helper, and found Abu
Rafi lying straight on his back, so I drove the sword into his belly and bent on
it till I heard the sound of a bone break. Then I came out, filled with
astonishment and went to the staircase to descend, but I fell down from it
and got my leg dislocated. I bandaged it and went to my companions
limping. I said (to them), 'Go and tell Allah's Apostle of this good news, but I
will not leave (this place) till I hear the news of his (i.e. Abu Rafi's) death.'
When dawn broke, an announcer of death got over the wall and announced,
'I convey to you the news of Abu Rafi's death.' I got up and proceeded
without feeling any pain till I caught up with my companions before they
reached the Prophet to whom I conveyed the good news."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 373:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
On the day of Uhud. the Prophet said, "This is Gabriel holding the head of his
horse and equipped with war material.'

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 374:
Narrated Uqba bin Amir:
Allah's Apostle offered the funeral prayers of the martyrs of Uhud eight
years after (their death), as if bidding farewell to the living and the dead,
then he ascended the pulpit and said, "I am your predecessor before you,
and I am a witness on you, and your promised place to meet me will be AlHaud (i.e. the Tank) (on the Day of Resurrection), and I am (now) looking at
it from this place of mine. I am not afraid that you will worship others
besides Allah, but I am afraid that worldly life will tempt you and cause you
to compete with each other for it." That was the last look which I cast on
Allah's Apostle.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 375:
Narrated Al-Bara:
We faced the pagans on that day (of the battle of Uhud) and the Prophet
placed a batch of archers (at a special place) and appointed 'Abdullah (bin
Jubair) as their commander and said, "Do not leave this place; and if you
should see us conquering the enemy, do not leave this place, and if you
should see them conquering us, do not (come to) help us," So, when we
faced the enemy, they took to their heel till I saw their women running
towards the mountain, lifting up their clothes from their legs, revealing their
leg-bangles. The Muslims started saying, "The booty, the booty!" 'Abdullah
bin Jubair said, "The Prophet had taken a firm promise from me not to leave
this place." But his companions refused (to stay). So when they refused (to
stay there), (Allah) confused them so that they could not know where to go,
and they suffered seventy casualties. Abu Sufyan ascended a high place and
said, "Is Muhammad present amongst the people?" The Prophet said, "Do
not answer him." Abu Sufyan said, "Is the son of Abu Quhafa present among
the people?" The Prophet said, "Do not answer him." Abd Sufyan said, "Is
the son of Al-Khattab amongst the people?" He then added, "All these
people have been killed, for, were they alive, they would have replied." On
that, 'Umar could not help saying, "You are a liar, O enemy of Allah! Allah
has kept what will make you unhappy." Abu Safyan said, "Superior may be
Hubal!" On that the Prophet said (to his companions), "Reply to him." They
asked, "What may we say?" He said, "Say: Allah is More Elevated and More
Majestic!" Abu Sufyan said, "We have (the idol) Al-'Uzza, whereas you have
no 'Uzza!" The Prophet said (to his companions), "Reply to him." They said,
"What may we say?" The Prophet said, "Say: Allah is our Helper and you
have no helper." Abu Sufyan said, "(This) day compensates for our loss at
Badr and (in) the battle (the victory) is always undecided and shared in turns
by the belligerents. You will see some of your dead men mutilated, but
neither did I urge this action, nor am I sorry for it." Narrated Jabir: Some
people took wine in the morning of the day of Uhud and were then killed as
martyrs.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 376:
Narrated Sad bin Ibrahim:
A meal was brought to 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf while he was fasting. He
said, "Musab bin 'Umar was martyred, and he was better than I, yet he was
shrouded in a Burda (i.e. a sheet) so that, if his head was covered, his feet
became naked, and if his feet were covered, his head became naked."
'Abdur-Rahman added, "Hamza was martyred and he was better than 1.
Then worldly wealth was bestowed upon us and we were given thereof too
much. We are afraid that the reward of our deeds have been given to us in
this life." 'Abdur-Rahman then started weeping so much that he left the
food.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 377:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
On the day of the battle of Uhud, a man came to the Prophet and said, "Can
you tell me where I will be if I should get martyred?" The Prophet replied, "In
Paradise." The man threw away some dates he was carrying in his hand, and
fought till he was martyred .

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 378:
Narrated Khabbab bin Al-Art:
We migrated in the company of Allah's Apostle, seeking Allah's Pleasure. So
our reward became due and sure with Allah. Some of us have been dead
without enjoying anything of their rewards (here), and one of them was
Mus'ab bin 'Umar who was martyred on the day of the battle of Uhud, and
did not leave anything except a Namira (i.e. a sheet in which he was
shrouded). If we covered his head with it, his feet became naked, and if we
covered his feet with it, his head became naked. So the Prophet said to us,
"Cover his head with it and put some Idhkhir (i.e. a kind of grass) over his
feet or throw Idhkhir over his feet." But some amongst us have got the
fruits of their labor ripened, and they are collecting them.
Narrated Anas: His uncle (Anas bin An-Nadr) was absent from the battle of
Badr and he said, "I was absent from the first battle of the Prophet (i.e. Badr
battle), and if Allah should let me participate in (a battle) with the Prophet,
Allah will see how strongly I will fight." So he encountered the day of Uhud
battle. The Muslims fled and he said, "O Allah ! I appeal to You to excuse me
for what these people (i.e. the Muslims) have done, and I am clear from
what the pagans have done." Then he went forward with his sword and met
Sad bin Mu'adh (fleeing), and asked him, "Where are you going, O Sad? I
detect a smell of Paradise before Uhud." Then he proceeded on and was
martyred. No-body was able to recognize him till his sister recognized him
by a mole on his body or by the tips of his fingers. He had over 80 wounds
caused by stabbing, striking or shooting with arrows.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 379:
Narrated Zaid bin Thabit:
When we wrote the Holy Quran, I missed one of the Verses of Surat-alAhzab which I used to hear Allah's Apostle reciting. Then we searched for it
and found it with Khuzaima bin Thabit Al-Ansari. The Verse was:-'Among the Believers are men Who have been true to Their Covenant with
Allah, Of them, some have fulfilled Their obligations to Allah (i.e. they have
been Killed in Allah's Cause), And some of them are (still) waiting" (33.23) So
we wrote this in its place in the Quran.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 380:
Narrated Zaid bin Thabit:
When the Prophet set out for (the battle of) Uhud, some of those who had
gone out with him, returned. The companions of the Prophet were divided
into two groups. One group said, "We will fight them (i.e. the enemy)," and
the other group said, "We will not fight them." So there came the Divine
Revelation:-- '(O Muslims!) Then what is the matter within you that you are
divided. Into two parties about the hypocrites? Allah has cast them back (to
disbelief) Because of what they have earned.' (4.88) On that, the Prophet
said, "That is Taiba (i.e. the city of Medina) which clears one from one's sins
as the fire expels the impurities of silver."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 381:
Narrated Jabir:
This Verse: "When two of your parties almost Decided to fall away..." was
revealed in our connection, i.e. Bani Salama and Bani Haritha and I would
not have liked that, if it was not revealed, for Allah said:-- But Allah was their
Protector.....(3.122)

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 382:
Narrated Jabir:
"Allah's Apostle said to me, "Have you got married O Jabir?" I replied, "Yes."
He asked "What, a virgin or a matron?" I replied, "Not a virgin but a matron."
He said, "Why did you not marry a young girl who would have fondled with
you?" I replied, "O Allah's Apostle! My father was martyred on the day of
Uhud and left nine (orphan) daughters who are my nine sisters; so I disliked
to have another young girl of their age, but (I sought) an (elderly) woman
who could comb their hair and look after them." The Prophet said, "You
have done the right thing."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 383:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
That his father was martyred on the day of the battle of Uhud and was in
debt and left six (orphan) daughters. Jabir, added, "When the season of
plucking the dates came, I went to Allah's Apostle and said, "You know that
my father was martyred on the day of Uhud, and he was heavily in debt, and
I would like that the creditors should see you." The Prophet said, "Go and
pile every kind of dates apart." I did so and called him (i.e. the Prophet ).
When the creditors saw him, they started claiming their debts from me then
in such a harsh manner (as they had never done before). So when he saw
their attitude, he went round the biggest heap of dates thrice, and then sat
over it and said, 'O Jabir), call your companions (i.e. the creditors).' Then he
kept on measuring (and giving) to the creditors (their due) till Allah paid all
the debt of my father. I would have been satisfied to retain nothing of those
dates for my sisters after Allah had paid the debts of my father. But Allah
saved all the heaps (of dates), so that when I looked at the heap where the
Prophet had been sitting, it seemed as if a single date had not been taken
away thereof."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 384:
Narrated Sad bin Abi Waqqas:
I saw Allah's Apostle on the day of the battle of Uhud accompanied by two
men fighting on his behalf. They were dressed in white and were fighting as
bravely as possible. I had never seen them before, nor did I see them later
on.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 385:
Narrated Sad bin Abi Waqqas:
The Prophet took out a quiver (of arrows) for me on the day of Uhud and
said, "Throw (arrows); let my father and mother be sacrificed for you."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 386:
Narrated Sad:
Allah's Apostle mentioned both his father and mother for me on the day of
the battle of Uhud.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 387:
Narrated Ibn Al Musaiyab:
Sad bin Abi Waqqas said, "Allah's Apostle mentioned both his father and
mother for me on the day of the battle of Uhud." He meant when the
Prophet said (to Sad) while the latter was fighting. "Let my father and
mother be sacrificed for you!"

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 388:
Narrated 'Ali: I have never heard the Prophet mentioning both his father and
mother for anybody other than Sad.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 389:
Narrated 'Ali: I have never heard the Prophet mentioning his father and
mother for anybody other than Sad bin Malik. I heard him saying on the day
of Uhud, "O Sad throw (arrows)! Let my father and mother be sacrificed for
you !"

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 390:
Narrated Mu'tamir's father:
'Uthman said that on the day of the battle of Uhud, none remained with the
Prophet but Talha and Sad.
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 391:
Narrated As-Saib bin Yazid:
I have been in the company of 'AbdurRahman bin 'Auf, Talha bin
'Ubaidullah, Al-Miqdad and Sad, and I heard none of them narrating
anything from the Prophet excepting the fact that I heard Talha narrating
about the day of Uhud (battle) .

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 392:
Narrated Qais:
I saw Talha's paralyzed hand with which he had protected the Prophet on
the day of Uhud.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 393:
Narrated Anas:
When it was the day of Uhud, the people left the Prophet while Abu Talha
was in front of the Prophet shielding him with his leather shield. Abu Talha
was a skillful archer who used to shoot violently. He broke two or three
arrow bows on that day. If a man carrying a quiver full of arrows passed by,
the Prophet would say (to him), put (scatter) its contents for Abu Talha."
The Prophet would raise his head to look at the enemy, whereupon Abu
Talha would say, "Let my father and mother be sacrificed for you ! Do not
raise your head, lest an arrow of the enemy should hit you. (Let) my neck
(be struck) rather than your neck." I saw 'Aisha, the daughter of Abu Bakr,
and Um Sulaim rolling up their dresses so that I saw their leg-bangles while
they were carrying water skins on their backs and emptying them in the
mouths of the (wounded) people. They would return to refill them and
again empty them in the mouths of the (wounded) people. The sword fell
from Abu Talha's hand twice or thrice (on that day).
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 394:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When it was the day of Uhud, the pagans were defeated. Then Satan, Allah's
Curse be upon him, cried loudly, "O Allah's Worshippers, beware of what is
behind!" On that, the front files of the (Muslim) forces turned their backs
and started fighting with the back files. Hudhaifa looked, and on seeing his
father Al-Yaman, he shouted, "O Allah's Worshippers, my father, my father!"
But by Allah, they did not stop till they killed him. Hudhaifa said, "May Allah
forgive you." (The sub-narrator, 'Urwa, said, "By Allah, Hudhaifa continued
asking Allah's Forgiveness for the killers of his father till he departed to Allah
(i.e. died).")

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 395:
Narrated 'Uthman bin Mauhab:
A man came to perform the Hajj to (Allah's) House. Seeing some people
sitting, he said, "Who are these sitting people?" Somebody said, "They are
the people of Quraish." He said, "Who is the old man?" They said, "Ibn
'Umar." He went to him and said, "I want to ask you about something; will
you tell me about it? I ask you with the respect due to the sanctity of this
(Sacred) House, do you know that 'Uthman bin 'Affan fled on the day of
Uhud?" Ibn 'Umar said, "Yes." He said, "Do you know that he (i.e. 'Uthman)
was absent from the Badr (battle) and did not join it?" Ibn 'Umar said, "Yes."
He said, "Do you know that he failed to be present at the Ridwan Pledge of
allegiance (i.e. Pledge of allegiance at Hudaibiya) and did not witness it?" Ibn
'Umar replied, "Yes," He then said, "Allahu-Akbar!" Ibn 'Umar said, "Come
along; I will inform you and explain to you what you have asked. As for the
flight (of 'Uthman) on the day of Uhud, I testify that Allah forgave him. As
regards his absence from the Badr (battle), he was married to the daughter
of Allah's Apostle and she was ill, so the Prophet said to him, 'You will have
such reward as a man who has fought the Badr battle will get, and will also
have the same share of the booty.' As for his absence from the Ridwan
Pledge of allegiance if there had been anybody more respected by the
Meccans than 'Uthman bin 'Affan, the Prophet would surely have sent that
man instead of 'Uthman. So the Prophet sent him (i.e. 'Uthman to Mecca)
and the Ridwan Pledge of allegiance took place after 'Uthman had gone to
Mecca. The Prophet raised his right hand saying. 'This is the hand of
'Uthman,' and clapped it over his other hand and said, "This is for
'Uthman.'" Ibn 'Umar then said (to the man), "Go now, after taking this
information."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 396:
Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib:
The Prophet appointed Abdullah bin Jubair as the commander of the cavalry
archers on the day of the battle of Uhud. Then they returned defeated, and
that what is referred to by Allah's Statement:-- "And the Apostle
(Muhammad) in your rear was calling you." (3.153)

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 397:
Narrated Salim's father:
That he heard Allah's Apostle, when raising his head from bowing of the first
Rak'a of the morning prayer, saying, "O Allah! Curse so-and-so and so-andso" after he had said, "Allah hears him who sends his praises to Him. Our
Lord, all the Praises are for you!" So Allah revealed:-- "Not for you (O
Muhammad! )......(till the end of Verse) they are indeed wrong-doers."
(3.128) Salim bin 'Abdullah said' "Allah's Apostle used to invoke evil upon
Safwan bin Umaiya, Suhail bin 'Amr and Al-Harith bin Hisham. So the Verse
was revealed:-- "Not for you (O Muhammad!)......(till the end of Verse) For
they are indeed wrong-doers." (3.128)

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 398:
Narrated Tha'laba bin Abi Malik:
'Umar bin Al-Khattab distributed woolen clothes amongst some women of
Medina, and a nice woolen garment remained. Some of those who were
sitting with him, said, "O chief of the believers! Give it to the daughter of
Allah's Apostle who is with you," and by that, they meant Um Kulthum, the
daughter of 'Ali. Umar said, "Um Salit has got more right than she." Um Saht
was amongst those Ansari women who had given the pledge of allegiance
to Allah's Apostle . 'Umar added, "She (i.e. Um Salit) used to carry the filled
water skins for us on the day of the battle of Uhud."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 399:
Narrated Jafar bin 'Amr bin Umaiya:
I went out with 'Ubaidullah bin 'Adi Al-Khaiyar. When we reached Hims (i.e. a
town in Syria), 'Ubaidullah bin 'Adi said (to me), "Would you like to see
Wahshi so that we may ask him about the killing of Hamza?" I replied, "Yes."
Wahshi used to live in Hims. We enquired about him and somebody said to
us, "He is that in the shade of his palace, as if he were a full water skin." So
we went up to him, and when we were at a short distance from him, we
greeted him and he greeted us in return. 'Ubaidullah was wearing his turban
and Wahshi could not see except his eyes and feet. 'Ubaidullah said, "O
Wahshi! Do you know me?" Wahshi looked at him and then said, "No, by
Allah! But I know that 'Adi bin Al-Khiyar married a woman called Um Qital,
the daughter of Abu Al-Is, and she delivered a boy for him at Mecca, and I
looked for a wet nurse for that child. (Once) I carried that child along with
his mother and then I handed him over to her, and your feet resemble that
child's feet." Then 'Ubaidullah uncovered his face and said (to Wahshi), "Will
you tell us (the story of) the killing of Hamza?" Wahshi replied "Yes, Hamza
killed Tuaima bin 'Adi bin Al-Khaiyar at Badr (battle) so my master, Jubair bin
Mut'im said to me, 'If you kill Hamza in revenge for my uncle, then you will
be set free." When the people set out (for the battle of Uhud) in the year of
'Ainain ..'Ainain is a mountain near the mountain of Uhud, and between it
and Uhud there is a valley.. I went out with the people for the battle. When
the army aligned for the fight, Siba' came out and said, 'Is there any
(Muslim) to accept my challenge to a duel?' Hamza bin 'Abdul Muttalib came
out and said, 'O Siba'. O Ibn Um Anmar, the one who circumcises other
ladies! Do you challenge Allah and His Apostle?' Then Hamza attacked and
killed him, causing him to be non-extant like the bygone yesterday. I hid
myself under a rock, and when he (i.e. Hamza) came near me, I threw my
spear at him, driving it into his umbilicus so that it came out through his
buttocks, causing him to die. When all the people returned to Mecca, I too
returned with them. I stayed in (Mecca) till Islam spread in it (i.e. Mecca).
Then I left for Taif, and when the people (of Taif) sent their messengers to
Allah's Apostle, I was told that the Prophet did not harm the messengers; So
I too went out with them till I reached Allah's Apostle. When he saw me, he
said, 'Are you Wahshi?' I said, 'Yes.' He said, 'Was it you who killed Hamza?' I
replied, 'What happened is what you have been told of.' He said, 'Can you
hide your face from me?' So I went out when Allah's Apostle died, and
Musailamah Al-Kadhdhab appeared (claiming to be a prophet). I said, 'I will
go out to Musailamah so that I may kill him, and make amends for killing
Hamza. So I went out with the people (to fight Musailamah and his
followers) and then famous events took place concerning that battle.
Suddenly I saw a man (i.e. Musailamah) standing near a gap in a wall. He
looked like an ash-colored camel and his hair was dishevelled. So I threw my
spear at him, driving it into his chest in between his breasts till it passed out
through his shoulders, and then an Ansari man attacked him and struck him
on the head with a sword. 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, 'A slave girl on the roof
of a house said: Alas! The chief of the believers (i.e. Musailamah) has been
killed by a black slave."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 400:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle (pointing to his broken canine tooth) said, "Allah's Wrath has
become severe on the people who harmed His Prophet. Allah's Wrath has
become severe on the man who is killed by the Apostle of Allah in Allah's
Cause."
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 401:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas
Allah's Wrath became severe on him whom the Prophet had killed in Allah's
Cause. Allah's Wrath became severe on the people who caused the face of
Allah's Prophet to bleed.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 402:
Narrated Abu Hazim:
That he heard Sahl bin Sad being asked about the wounds of Allah's Apostle
saying, "By Allah, I know who washed the wounds of Allah's Apostle and
who poured water (for washing them), and with what he was treated." Sahl
added, "Fatima, the daughter of Allah's Apostle used to wash the wounds,
and 'Ali bin Abi Talib used to pour water from a shield. When Fatima saw
that the water aggravated the bleeding, she took a piece of a mat, burnt it,
and inserted its ashes into the wound so that the blood was congealed (and
bleeding stopped). His canine tooth got broken on that day, and face was
wounded, and his helmet was broken on his head."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 403:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Allah's Wrath gets severe on a person killed by a prophet, and Allah's Wrath
became severe on him who had caused the face of Allah's Apostle to bleed

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 404:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Regarding the Holy Verse: "Those who responded (To the call) of Allah And
the Apostle (Muhammad), After being wounded, For those of them Who did
good deeds And refrained from wrong, there is a great reward." (3.172)
She said to 'Urwa, "O my nephew! Your father, Az-Zubair and Abu Bakr were
amongst them (i.e. those who responded to the call of Allah and the Apostle
on the day (of the battle of Uhud). When Allah's Apostle, suffered what he
suffered on the day of Uhud and the pagans left, the Prophet was afraid
that they might return. So he said, 'Who will go on their (i.e. pagans') track?'
He then selected seventy men from amongst them (for this purpose)." (The
sub-narrator added, "Abu Bakr and Az-Zubair were amongst them.")

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 405:
Narrated Qatada:
We do not know of any tribe amongst the 'Arab tribes who lost more
martyrs than Al-Ansar, and they will have superiority on the Day of
Resurrection. Anas bin Malik told us that seventy from the Ansar were
martyred on the day of Uhud, and seventy on the day (of the battle of) Bir
Ma'una, and seventy on the day of Al-Yamama. Anas added, "The battle of
Bir Ma'una took place during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle and the battle of
Al-Yamama, during the caliphate of Abu Bakr, and it was the day when
Musailamah Al-Kadhdhab was killed."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 406:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah
Allah's Apostle used to shroud two martyrs of Uhud in one sheet and then
say, "Which of them knew Quran more?" When one of the two was pointed
out, he would put him first in the grave. Then he said, "I will be a witness for
them on the Day of Resurrection." He ordered them to be buried with their
blood (on their bodies). Neither was the funeral prayer offered for them,
nor were they washed. Jabir added, "When my father was martyred, I
started weeping and uncovering his face. The companions of the Prophet
stopped me from doing so but the Prophet did not stop me. Then the
Prophet said, '(O Jabir.) don't weep over him, for the angels kept on
covering him with their wings till his body was carried away (for burial)."
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 407:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "I saw in a dream that I moved a sword and its blade got
broken, and that symbolized the casualties which the believers suffered on
the day of Uhud. Then I moved it again, and it became as perfect as it had
been, and that symbolized the Conquest (of Mecca) which Allah helped us
to achieve, and the union of all the believers. I (also) saw cows in the dream,
and what Allah does is always beneficial. Those cows appeared to symbolize
the faithful believers (who were martyred) on the day of Uhud."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 408:
Narrated Khabbab:
We migrated with the Prophet for Allah's Cause, so our reward became due
with Allah. Some of us passed away (i.e. died) without enjoying anything
from their reward, and one of them was Mus'ab bin 'Umar who was killed
(i.e. martyred) on the day of Uhud. He did not leave behind except a sheet
of striped woolen cloth. If we covered his head with it, his feet became
naked, and if we covered his feet with it, his head became naked. The
Prophet said to us, "Cover his head with it and put Idhkhir (i.e. a kind of
grass) over his feet," or said, "Put some Idhkhir over his feet." But some of
us have got their fruits ripened, and they are collecting them.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 409:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "This is a mountain that loves us and is loved by us."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 410:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
When the mountain of Uhud appeared before Allah's Apostle he said, "This
IS a mountain that loves us and is loved by us. O, Allah! Abraham made
Mecca a Sanctuary, and I have made Medina (i.e. the area between its two
mountains) a Sanctuary as well."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 411:
Narrated Uqba:
One day the Prophet went out and offered the (funeral) prayer for the
people (i.e. martyrs) of Uhud as he used to offer a funeral prayer for any
dead person, and then (after returning) he ascended the pulpit and said, "I
am your predecessor before you, and I am a witness upon you, and I am
looking at my Tank just now, and I have been given the keys of the treasures
of the world (or the keys of the world). By Allah, I am not afraid that you will
worship others besides Allah after me, but I am afraid that you will compete
with each other for (the pleasures of) this world."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 412:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet sent a Sariya of spies and appointed 'Asim bin Thabit, the
grandfather of 'Asim bin 'Umar bin Al-Khattab, as their leader. So they set
out, and when they reached (a place) between 'Usfan and Mecca, they were
mentioned to one of the branch tribes of Bani Hudhail called Lihyan. So,
about one-hundred archers followed their traces till they (i.e. the archers)
came to a journey station where they (i.e. 'Asim and his companions) had
encamped and found stones of dates they had brought as journey food
from Medina.
The archers said, "These are the dates of Medina," and followed their traces
till they took them over. When 'Asim and his companions were not able to
go ahead, they went up a high place, and their pursuers encircled them and
said, "You have a covenant and a promise that if you come down to us, we
will not kill anyone of you." 'Asim said, "As for me, I will never come down
on the security of an infidel. O Allah! Inform Your Prophet about us." So they
fought with them till they killed 'Asim along with seven of his companions
with arrows, and there remained Khubaib, Zaid and another man to whom
they gave a promise and a covenant. So when the infidels gave them the
covenant and promise, they came down. When they captured them, they
opened the strings of their arrow bows and tied them with it. The third man
who was with them said, "This is the first breach in the covenant," and
refused to accompany them. They dragged him and tried to make him
accompany them, but he refused, and they killed him. Then they proceeded
on taking Khubaib and Zaid till they sold them in Mecca. The sons of AlHarith bin 'Amr bin Naufal bought Khubaib. It was Khubaib who had killed
Al-Harith bin 'Amr on the day of Badr. Khubaib stayed with them for a while
as a captive till they decided unanimously to kill him. (At that time) Khubaib
borrowed a razor from one of the daughters of Al-Harith to shave his pubic
hair. She gave it to him. She said later on, "I was heedless of a little baby of
mine, who moved towards Khubaib, and when it reached him, he put it on
his thigh.
When I saw it, I got scared so much that Khubaib noticed my distress while
he was carrying the razor in his hand. He said 'Are you afraid that I will kill it?
Allah willing, I will never do that,' " Later on she used to say, "I have never
seen a captive better than Khubaib Once I saw him eating from a bunch of
grapes although at that time no fruits were available at Mecca, and he was
fettered with iron chains, and in fact, it was nothing but food bestowed
upon him by Allah." So they took him out of the Sanctuary (of Mecca) to kill
him. He said, "Allow me to offer a two-Rak'at prayer." Then he went to them
and said, "Had I not been afraid that you would think I was afraid of death, I
would have prayed for a longer time." So it was Khubaib who first set the
tradition of praying two Rakat before being executed. He then said, "O
Allah! Count them one by one," and added, 'When I am being martyred as a
Muslim, I do not care in what way I receive my death for Allah's Sake,
because this death is in Allah's Cause. If He wishes, He will bless the cut
limbs." Then 'Uqba bin Al-Harith got up and martyred him. The narrator
added: The Quraish (infidels) sent some people to 'Asim in order to bring a
part of his body so that his death might be known for certain, for 'Asim had
killed one of their chiefs on the day of Badr. But Allah sent a cloud of wasps
which protected his body from their messengers who could not harm his
body consequently.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 413:
Narrated Jabir:
The person who killed Khubaib was Abu Sarua (i.e. 'Uqba bin Al-Harith).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 414:
Narrated 'Abdul Aziz:
Anas said, "The Prophet sent seventy men, called Al-Qurra 'for some
purpose. The two groups of Bani Sulaim called Ri'l and Dhakwan, appeared
to them near a well called Bir Ma'una. The people (i.e. Al-Qurra) said, 'By
Allah, we have not come to harm you, but we are passing by you on our way
to do something for the Prophet.' But (the infidels) killed them. The Prophet
therefore invoked evil upon them for a month during the morning prayer.
That was the beginning of Al Qunut and we used not to say Qunut before
that." A man asked Anas about Al-Qunut, "Is it to be said after the Bowing
(in the prayer) or after finishing the Recitation (i.e. before Bowing)?" Anas
replied, "No, but (it is to be said) after finishing the Recitation."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 415:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle said Al-Qunut for one month after the posture of Bowing,
invoking evil upon some 'Arab tribes.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 416:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
(The tribes of) Ril, Dhakwan, 'Usaiya and Bani Lihyan asked Allah's Apostle
to provide them with some men to support them against their enemy. He
therefore provided them with seventy men from the Ansar whom we used
to call Al-Qurra' in their lifetime. They used to collect wood by daytime and
pray at night. When they were at the well of Ma'una, the infidels killed them
by betraying them. When this news reached the Prophet , he said Al-Qunut
for one month In the morning prayer, invoking evil upon some of the 'Arab
tribes, upon Ril, Dhakwan, 'Usaiya and Bani Libyan. We used to read a verse
of the Qur'an revealed in their connection, but later the verse was cancelled.
It was: "convey to our people on our behalf the information that we have
met our Lord, and He is pleased with us, and has made us pleased." (Anas
bin Malik added:) Allah's Prophet said Qunut for one month in the morning
prayer, invoking evil upon some of the 'Arab tribes (namely), Ril, Dhakwan,
Usaiya, and Bani Libyan. (Anas added:) Those seventy Ansari men were killed
at the well of Mauna.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 417:
Narrated Anas:
That the Prophet sent his uncle, the brother of Um Sulaim at the head of
seventy riders. The chief of the pagans, 'Amir bin At-Tufail proposed three
suggestions (to the Prophet ) saying, "Choose one of three alternatives: (1)
that the bedouins will be under your command and the townspeople will be
under my command; (2) or that I will be your successor, (3) or otherwise I
will attack you with two thousand from Bani Ghatafan." But 'Amir was
infected with plague in the House of Um so-and-so. He said, "Shall I stay in
the house of a lady from the family of so-and-so after having a (swelled)
gland like that she-camel? Get me my horse." So he died on the back of his
horse. Then Haram, the brother of Um Sulaim and a lame man along with
another man from so-and-so (tribe) went towards the pagans (i.e. the tribe
of 'Amir). Haram said (to his companions), "Stay near to me, for I will go to
them. If they (i.e. infidels) should give me protection, you will be near to me,
and if they should kill me, then you should go back to your companions.
Then Haram went to them and said, "Will you give me protection so as to
convey the message of Allah's Apostle ?" So, he started talking to them' but
they signalled to a man (to kill him) and he went behind him and stabbed
him (with a spear). He (i.e. Haram) said, "Allahu Akbar! I have succeeded, by
the Lord of the Ka'ba!" The companion of Haram was pursued by the
infidels, and then they (i.e. Haram's companions) were all killed except the
lame man who was at the top of a mountain. Then Allah revealed to us a
verse that was among the cancelled ones later on. It was: 'We have met our
Lord and He is pleased with us and has made us pleased.' (After this event)
the Prophet invoked evil on the infidels every morning for 30 days. He
invoked evil upon the (tribes of) Ril, Dhakwan, Bani Lihyan and Usaiya who
disobeyed Allah and His Apostle

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 418:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
That when Haram bin Milhan, his uncle was stabbed on the day of Bir
Ma'una he sprinkled his blood over his face and his head this way and then
said, "I have succeeded, by the Lord of the Ka'ba.'

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 419:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Abu Bakr asked the Prophet to allow him to go out (of Mecca) when he was
greatly annoyed (by the infidels). But the Prophet said to him, ''Wait." Abu
Bakr said, O Allah's Apostle! Do you hope that you will be allowed (to
migrate)?" Allah's Apostle replied, "I hope so." So Abu Bakr waited for him
till one day Allah's Apostle came at noon time and addressed him saying
"Let whoever is present with you, now leave you." Abu Bakr said, "None is
present but my two daughters." The Prophet said, "Have you noticed that I
have been allowed to go out (to migrate)?" Abu Bakr said, "O Allah's
Apostle, I would like to accompany you." The Prophet said, "You will
accompany me." Abu Bakr said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have got two she-
camels which I had prepared and kept ready for (our) going out." So he gave
one of the two (she-camels) to the Prophet and it was Al-Jad'a . They both
rode and proceeded till they reached the Cave at the mountain of Thaur
where they hid themselves. Amir bin Fuhaira was the slave of 'Abdullah bin
Al-Tufail bin Sakhbara 'Aisha's brother from her mother's side. Abu Bakr had
a milch she-camel. Amir used to go with it (i.e. the milch she-camel) in the
afternoon and come back to them before noon by setting out towards them
in the early morning when it was still dark and then he would take it to the
pasture so that none of the shepherds would be aware of his job. When the
Prophet (and Abu Bakr) went away (from the Cave), he (i.e. 'Amir) too went
along with them and they both used to make him ride at the back of their
camels in turns till they reached Medina. 'Amir bin Fuhaira was martyred on
the day of Bir Ma'una.
Narrated 'Urwa: When those (Muslims) at Bir Ma'una were martyred and
'Amr bin Umaiya Ad-Damri was taken prisoner, 'Amir bin At-Tufail, pointing
at a killed person, asked Amr, "Who is this?" 'Amr bin Umaiya said to him,
"He is 'Amir bin Fuhaira." 'Amir bin At-Tufail said, "I saw him lifted to the sky
after he was killed till I saw the sky between him and the earth, and then he
was brought down upon the earth. Then the news of the killed Muslims
reached the Prophet and he announced the news of their death saying,
"Your companions (of Bir Ma'una) have been killed, and they have asked
their Lord saying, 'O our Lord! Inform our brothers about us as we are
pleased with You and You are pleased with us." So Allah informed them (i.e.
the Prophet and his companions) about them (i.e. martyrs of Bir Mauna).
On that day, 'Urwa bin Asma bin As-Salt who was one of them, was killed,
and Urwa (bin Az-Zubair) was named after 'Urwa bin Asma and Mundhir (bin
AzZubair) was named after Mundhir bin 'Amr (who had also been martyred
on that day).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 420:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said Al-Qunut after Bowing (i.e. Ar-Ruku') for one month,
invoking evil upon (the tribes of) Ril and Dhakwan. He used to say, "Usaiya
disobeyed Allah and His Apostle."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 421:
Narrated Anas bin Malik :
The Prophet invoked evil upon those (people) who killed his companions at
Bir Mauna for 30 days (in the morning prayer). He invoked evil upon (tribes
of) Ril, Lihyan and Usaiya who disobeyed Allah and His Apostle. Allah
revealed a Quranic Verse to His Prophet regarding those who had been
killed, i.e. the Muslims killed at Bir Ma'una, and we recited the Verse till later
it was cancelled. (The Verse was:) 'Inform our people that we have met our
Lord, and He is pleased with us, and we are pleased with Him."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 422:
Narrated Asim Al-Ahwal:
I asked Anas bin Malik regarding Al-Qunut during the prayer. Anas replied,
"Yes (Al-Qunut was said by the Prophet in the prayer)." I said, "Is it before
Bowing or after Bowing?" Anas replied, "(It was said) before (Bowing)." I
said, "So-and-so informed me that you told him that it was said after
Bowing." Anas replied, "He was mistaken, for Allah's Apostle said Al-Qunut
after Bowing for one month. The Prophet had sent some people called AlQurra who were seventy in number, to some pagan people who had
concluded a peace treaty with Allah's Apostle . But those who had
concluded the treaty with Allah's Apostle violated the treaty (and martyred
all the seventy men). So Allah's Apostle said Al-Qunut after Bowing (in the
prayer) for one month, invoking evil upon them.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 423:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
That the Prophet inspected him on the day of Uhud while he was fourteen
years old, and the Prophet did not allow him to take part in the battle. He
was inspected again by the Prophet on the day of Al-Khandaq (i.e. battle of
the Trench) while he was fifteen years old, and the Prophet allowed him to
take Part in the battle.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 424:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
We were with Allah's Apostle in the Trench, and some were digging the
trench while we were carrying the earth on our shoulders. Allah's Apostle
said, 'O Allah! There is no life except the life of the Hereafter, so please
forgive the Emigrants and the Ansar."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 425:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle went out towards the Khandaq (i.e. Trench) and saw the
Emigrants and the Ansar digging the trench in the cold morning. They had
no slaves to do that (work) for them. When the Prophet saw their hardship
and hunger, he said, 'O Allah! The real life is the life of the Hereafter, so
please forgive Ansar and the Emigrants." They said in reply to him, "We are
those who have given the Pledge of allegiances to Muhammad for to
observe Jihad as long as we live."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 426:
Narrated Anas:
Al-Muhajirun (i.e. the Emigrants) and the Ansar were digging the trench
around Medina and were carrying the earth on their backs while saying, "We
are those who have given the pledge of allegiance to Muhammad for Islam
as long as we live." The Prophet said in reply to their saying, "O Allah! There
is no goodness except the goodness of the Hereafter; so please grant Your
Blessing to the Ansar and the Emigrants." The people used to bring a
handful of barley, and a meal used to be prepared thereof by cooking it with
a cooking material (i.e. oil, fat and butter having a change in color and smell)
and it used to be presented to the people (i.e. workers) who were hungry,
and it used to stick to their throats and had a nasty smell.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 427:
Narrated Jabir:
We were digging (the trench) on the day of (Al-Khandaq ( i.e. Trench )) and
we came across a big solid rock. We went to the Prophet and said, "Here is a
rock appearing across the trench." He said, "I am coming down." Then he
got up, and a stone was tied to his belly for we had not eaten anything for
three days. So the Prophet took the spade and struck the big solid rock and
it became like sand. I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Allow me to go home." (When
the Prophet allowed me) I said to my wife, "I saw the Prophet in a state that
I cannot treat lightly. Have you got something (for him to eat?" She replied,
"I have barley and a she goat." So I slaughtered the she-kid and she ground
the barley; then we put the meat in the earthenware cooking pot. Then I
came to the Prophet when the dough had become soft and fermented and
(the meat in) the pot over the stone trivet had nearly been well-cooked, and
said, "I have got a little food prepared, so get up O Allah's Apostle, you and
one or two men along with you (for the food)." The Prophet asked, "How
much is that food?" I told him about it. He said, "It is abundant and good.
Tell your wife not to remove the earthenware pot from the fire and not to
take out any bread from the oven till I reach there." Then he said (to all his
companions), "Get up." So the Muhajirn (i.e. Emigrants) and the Ansar got
up. When I came to my wife, I said, "Allah's Mercy be upon you! The Prophet
came along with the Muhajirin and the Ansar and those who were present
with them." She said, "Did the Prophet ask you (how much food you had)?" I
replied, "Yes." Then the Prophet said, "Enter and do not throng." The
Prophet started cutting the bread (into pieces) and put the cooked meat
over it. He covered the earthenware pot and the oven whenever he took
something out of them. He would give the food to his companions and take
the meat out of the pot. He went on cutting the bread and scooping the
meat (for his companions) till they all ate their fill, and even then, some food
remained. Then the Prophet said (to my wife), "Eat and present to others as
the people are struck with hunger."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 428:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
When the Trench was dug, I saw the Prophet in the state of severe hunger.
So I returned to my wife and said, "Have you got anything (to eat), for I have
seen Allah's Apostle in a state of severe hunger." She brought out for me, a
bag containing one Sa of barley, and we had a domestic she animal (i.e. a
kid) which I slaughtered then, and my wife ground the barley and she
finished at the time I finished my job (i.e. slaughtering the kid). Then I cut
the meat into pieces and put it in an earthenware (cooking) pot, and
returned to Allah's Apostle . My wife said, "Do not disgrace me in front of
Allah's Apostle and those who are with him." So I went to him and said to
him secretly, "O Allah's Apostle! I have slaughtered a she-animal (i.e. kid) of
ours, and we have ground a Sa of barley which was with us. So please come,
you and another person along with you." The Prophet raised his voice and
said, "O people of Trench ! Jabir has prepared a meal so let us go." Allah's
Apostle said to me, "Don't put down your earthenware meat pot (from the
fireplace) or bake your dough till I come." So I came (to my house) and
Allah's Apostle too, came, proceeding before the people. When I came to
my wife, she said, "May Allah do so-and-so to you." I said, "I have told the
Prophet of what you said." Then she brought out to him (i.e. the Prophet
the dough, and he spat in it and invoked for Allah's Blessings in it. Then he
proceeded towards our earthenware meat-pot and spat in it and invoked for
Allah's Blessings in it. Then he said (to my wife). Call a lady-baker to bake
along with you and keep on taking out scoops from your earthenware meatpot, and do not put it down from its fireplace." They were one-thousand
(who took their meals), and by Allah they all ate, and when they left the
food and went away, our earthenware pot was still bubbling (full of meat)
as if it had not decreased, and our dough was still being baked as if nothing
had been taken from it.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 429:
Narrated 'Aisha:
As regards the following Quranic Verse:-- "When they came on you from
above and from below you (from east and west of the valley) and when the
eyes grew wild and the hearts reached up to the throats....." (33.10) That
happened on the day of Al-Khandaq (i.e. Trench).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 430:
Narrated Al-Bara:
The Prophet was carrying earth on the day of Al-Khandaq till his abdomen
was fully covered with dust, and he was saying, "By Allah, without Allah we
would not have been guided, neither would we have given in charity, nor
would we have prayed. So (O Allah), please send Sakina (i.e. calmness) upon
us, and make our feet firm if we meet the enemy as the enemy have rebelled
against us, and if they intended affliction, (i.e. want to frighten us and fight
against us then we would not flee but withstand them)." The Prophet used
to raise his voice saying, "Abaina! Abaina! (i.e. would not, we would not)."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 431:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet said, "I have been made victorious by As-Saba (i.e. an easterly
wind) and the Ad nation was destroyed by Ad-Dabur (i.e. a westerly wind)."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 432:
Narrated Al-Bara
When it was the day of Al-Ahzab (i.e. the clans) and Allah's Apostle dug the
trench, I saw him carrying earth out of the trench till dust made the skin of
his abdomen out of my sight and he was a hairy man. I heard him reciting
the poetic verses composed by Ibn Rawaha while he was carrying the earth,
"O Allah! Without You we would not have been guided, nor would we have
given in charity, nor would we have prayed. So, (O Allah), please send Sakina
(i.e. calmness) upon us and make our feet firm if we meet the enemy, as
they have rebelled against us. And if they intend affliction (i.e. want to
frighten us, and fight against us) then we would not (flee but withstand
them)." The Prophet would then prolong his voice at the last words.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 433:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
The first day (i.e. Ghazwa) I participated in, was the day of Al-Khandaq (i.e.
Trench).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 434:
Narrated Ikrima bin Khalid:
Ibn 'Umar said, "I went to Hafsa while water was dribbling from her twined
braids. I said, 'The condition of the people is as you see, and no authority has
been given to me.' Hafsa said, (to me), 'Go to them, and as they (i.e. the
people) are waiting for you, and I am afraid your absence from them will
produce division amongst them.' " So Hafsa did not leave Ibn 'Umar till we
went to them. When the people differed. Muawiya addressed the people
saying, "'If anybody wants to say anything in this matter of the Caliphate, he
should show up and not conceal himself, for we are more rightful to be a
Caliph than he and his father." On that, Habib bin Masalama said (to Ibn
'Umar), "Why don't you reply to him (i.e. Muawiya)?" 'Abdullah bin 'Umar
said, "I untied my garment that was going round my back and legs while I
was sitting and was about to say, 'He who fought against you and against
your father for the sake of Islam, is more rightful to be a Caliph,' but I was
afraid that my statement might produce differences amongst the people
and cause bloodshed, and my statement might be interpreted not as I
intended. (So I kept quiet) remembering what Allah has prepared in the
Gardens of Paradise (for those who are patient and prefer the Hereafter to
this worldly life)." Habib said, "You did what kept you safe and secure (i.e.
you were wise in doing so)."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 435:
Narrated Sulaiman bin Surd:
On the day of Al-Ahzab (i.e. clans) the Prophet said, (After this battle) we
will go to attack them(i.e. the infidels) and they will not come to attack us."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 436:
Narrated Sulaiman bin Surd:
When the clans were driven away, I heard the Prophet saying, "From now
onwards we will go to attack them (i.e. the infidels) and they will not come
to attack us, but we will go to them."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 437:
Narrated 'Ali:
On the day of Al-Khandaq (i.e. Trench), the Prophet said '(Let) Allah fill their
(i.e. the infidels') houses and graves with fire just as they have prevented us
from offering the Middle Prayer (i.e. 'Asr prayer) till the sun had set."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 438:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Umar bin Al-Khattab came on the day of Al-Khandaq after the sun had set
and he was abusing the infidels of Quraish saying, "O Allah's Apostle! I was
unable to offer the ('Asr) prayer till the sun was about to set." The Prophet
said, "By Allah, I have not offered this (i.e. 'Asr) prayer." So we came down
along with the Prophet to Buthan where he performed ablution for the
prayer and then we performed the ablution for it. Then he offered the 'Asr
prayer after the sun had set, and after it he offered the Maghrib prayer.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 439:
Narrated Jabir:
On the day of Al-Ahzab (i.e. clans), Allah's Apostle said, 'Who will bring us
the news of the people (i.e. the clans of Quraish infidels)?" Az-Zubair said,
"I." The Prophet again said, "Who will bring us the news of the people?"
AzZubair said, "I." The Prophet again said, "Who will bring us the news of
the people?" Az-Zubair said, "I." The Prophet then said, "Every prophet has
his Hawari (i.e. disciple-special helper); my disciple is Az-Zubair.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 440:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle used to say, "None has the right to be worshipped except
Allah Alone (Who) honored His Warriors and made His Slave victorious, and
He (Alone) defeated the (infidel) clans; so there is nothing after Him.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 441:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi 'Aufa:
Allah's Apostle invoked evil upon the clans saying, "Allah, the Revealer of
the Holy Book (i.e. the Quran), the Quick Taker of the accounts! Please
defeat the clans. O Allah! Defeat them and shake them."
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 442:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
Whenever Allah's Apostle returned from a Ghazwa, Hajj or 'Umra, he used to
start (saying), "Allahu-Akbar," thrice and then he would say, "None has the
right to be worshipped except Allah alone Who has no partners. To Him
belongs the Kingdom, all praises are for Him, and He is able to do all things
(i.e. Omnipotent). We are returning with repentance (to Allah) worshipping,
prostrating, and praising our Lord. Allah has fulfilled His Promise, made His
Slave victorious, and He (Alone) defeated the clans (of infidels) ."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 443:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When the Prophet returned from Al-Khandaq (i.e. Trench) and laid down his
arms and took a bath, Gabriel came and said (to the Prophet ), You have laid
down your arms? By Allah, we angels have not laid them down yet. So set
out for them." The Prophet said, "Where to go?" Gabriel said, "Towards this
side," pointing towards Banu Quraiza. So the Prophet went out towards
them.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 444:
Narrated Anas:
As if I am just now looking at the dust rising in the street of Banu Ghanm (in
Medina) because of the marching of Gabriel's regiment when Allah's
Apostle set out to Banu Quraiza (to attack them).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 445:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
On the day of Al-Ahzab (i.e. Clans) the Prophet said, "None of you Muslims)
should offer the 'Asr prayer but at Banu Quraiza's place." The 'Asr prayer
became due for some of them on the way. Some of those said, "We will not
offer it till we reach it, the place of Banu Quraiza," while some others said,
"No, we will pray at this spot, for the Prophet did not mean that for us."
Later on It was mentioned to the Prophet and he did not berate any of the
two groups.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 446:
Narrated Anas:
Some (of the Ansar) used to present date palm trees to the Prophet till Banu
Quraiza and Banu An-Nadir were conquered (then he returned to the people
their date palms). My people ordered me to ask the Prophet to return some
or all the date palms they had given to him, but the Prophet had given those
trees to Um Aiman. On that, Um Aiman came and put the garment around
my neck and said, "No, by Him except Whom none has the right to be
worshipped, he will not return those trees to you as he (i.e. the Prophet )
has given them to me." The Prophet go said (to her), "Return those trees
and I will give you so much (instead of them)." But she kept on refusing,
saying, "No, by Allah," till he gave her ten times the number of her date
palms.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 447:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The people of (Banu) Quraiza agreed to accept the verdict of Sad bin
Mu'adh. So the Prophet sent for Sad, and the latter came (riding) a donkey
and when he approached the Mosque, the Prophet said to the Ansar, "Get
up for your chief or for the best among you." Then the Prophet said (to
Sad)." These (i.e. Banu Quraiza) have agreed to accept your verdict." Sad
said, "Kill their (men) warriors and take their offspring as captives, "On that
the Prophet said, "You have judged according to Allah's Judgment," or said,
"according to the King's judgment."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 448:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Sad was wounded on the day of Khandaq (i.e. Trench) when a man from
Quraish, called Hibban bin Al-'Araqa hit him (with an arrow). The man was
Hibban bin Qais from (the tribe of) Bani Mais bin 'Amir bin Lu'ai who shot an
arrow at Sad's medial arm vein (or main artery of the arm). The Prophet
pitched a tent (for Sad) in the Mosque so that he might be near to the
Prophet to visit. When the Prophet returned from the (battle) of Al-Khandaq
(i.e. Trench) and laid down his arms and took a bath Gabriel came to him
while he (i.e. Gabriel) was shaking the dust off his head, and said, "You have
laid down the arms?" By Allah, I have not laid them down. Go out to them
(to attack them)." The Prophet said, "Where?" Gabriel pointed towards Bani
Quraiza. So Allah's Apostle went to them (i.e. Banu Quraiza) (i.e. besieged
them). They then surrendered to the Prophet's judgment but he directed
them to Sad to give his verdict concerning them. Sad said, "I give my
judgment that their warriors should be killed, their women and children
should be taken as captives, and their properties distributed."
Narrated Hisham: My father informed me that 'Aisha said, "Sad said, "O
Allah! You know that there is nothing more beloved to me than to fight in
Your Cause against those who disbelieved Your Apostle and turned him out
(of Mecca). O Allah! I think you have put to an end the fight between us and
them (i.e. Quraish infidels). And if there still remains any fight with the
Quraish (infidels), then keep me alive till I fight against them for Your Sake.
But if you have brought the war to an end, then let this wound burst and
cause my death thereby.' So blood gushed from the wound. There was a
tent in the Mosque belonging to Banu Ghifar who were surprised by the
blood flowing towards them . They said, 'O people of the tent! What is this
thing which is coming to us from your side?' Behold! Blood was flowing
profusely out of Sad's wound. Sad then died because of that."
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 449:
Narrated Al-Bara:
The Prophet said to Hassan, "Abuse them (with your poems), and Gabriel is
with you (i.e, supports you)." (Through another group of sub narrators) AlBara bin Azib said, "On the day of Quraiza's (besiege), Allah's Apostle said to
Hassan bin Thabit, 'Abuse them (with your poems), and Gabriel is with you
(i.e. supports you).' "

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 450:
Narrated Abu Burda:
Abu Musa said, "We went out in the company of the Prophet for a Ghazwa
and we were six persons having one camel which we rode in rotation. So,
(due to excessive walking) our feet became thin and my feet became thin
and my nail dropped, and we used to wrap our feet with the pieces of cloth,
and for this reason, the Ghazwa was named Dhat-ur-Riqa as we wrapped our
feet with rags." When Abu- Musa narrated this (Hadith), he felt regretful to
do so and said, as if he disliked to have disclosed a good deed of his.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 451:
Narrated Salih bin Khawwat:
Concerning those who witnessed the Fear Prayer that was performed in the
battle of Dhat-ur-Riqa' in the company of Allah's Apostle; One batch lined up
behind him while another batch (lined up) facing the enemy. The Prophet
led the batch that was with him in one Rak'a, and he stayed in the standing
posture while that batch completed their (two Rakat) prayer by themselves
and went away, lining in the face of the enemy, while the other batch came
and he (i.e. the Prophet) offered his remaining Rak'a with them, and then,
kept on sitting till they completed their prayer by themselves, and he then
finished his prayer with Taslim along with them.
Narrated Ibn Az-Zubair: Jabir said, "We were with the Prophet at Nakhl,"
and then he mentioned the Fear prayer.
Narrated Al-Qasim bin Muhammad: The Prophet offered the Fear prayer in
the Ghazwa of Banu Anmar.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 452:
Narrated Sahl bin Abi Hathma:
(describing the Fear prayer): The Imam stands up facing the Qibla and one
batch of them (i.e. the army) (out of the two) prays along with him and the
other batch faces the enemy. The Imam offers one Rak'a with the first batch
they themselves stand up alone and offer one bowing and two prostrations
while they are still in their place, and then go away to relieve the second
batch, and the second batch comes (and takes the place of the first batch in
the prayer behind the Imam) and he offers the second Rak'a with them. So
he completes his two-Rak'at and then the second batch bows and
prostrates two prostrations (i.e. complete their second Rak'a and thus all
complete their prayer)

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 453:
Narrated Salih bin Hathma:
The Prophet said as above (Hadith 452).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 454:
Narrated Salih bin Khawwat:
Sahl said as above (Hadith 452).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 455:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
I took part in a Ghazwa towards Najd along with Allah's Apostle and we
clashed with the enemy, and we lined up for them.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 456:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle led the Fear-prayer with one of the two batches of the army
while the other (batch) faced the enemy. Then the first batch went away
and took places of their companions (i.e. second batch) and the second
batch came and he led his second Rak'a with them. Then he (i.e. the
Prophet: finished his prayer with Taslim and then each of the two batches
got up and completed their remaining one Rak'a.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 457:
Narrated Sinan and Abu Salama:
Jabir mentioned that he had participated in a Ghazwa towards Najd in the
company of Allah's Apostle .

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 458:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
That he fought in a Ghazwa towards Najd along with Allah's Apostle and
when Allah's Apostle returned, he too, returned along with him. The time of
the afternoon nap overtook them when they were in a valley full of thorny
trees. Allah's Apostle dismounted and the people dispersed amongst the
thorny trees, seeking the shade of the trees. Allah's Apostle took shelter
under a Samura tree and hung his sword on it. We slept for a while when
Allah's Apostle suddenly called us, and we went to him, to find a bedouin
sitting with him. Allah's Apostle said, "This (bedouin) took my sword out of
its sheath while I was asleep. When I woke up, the naked sword was in his
hand and he said to me, 'Who can save you from me?, I replied, 'Allah.' Now
here he is sitting." Allah's Apostle did not punish him (for that).
Through another group of narrators, Jabir said, "We were in the company of
the Prophet (during the battle of) Dhat-ur-Riqa', and we came across a
shady tree and we left it for the Prophet (to take rest under its shade). A
man from the pagans came while the Prophet's sword was hanging on the
tree. He took it out of its sheath secretly and said (to the Prophet ), 'Are you
afraid of me?' The Prophet said, 'No.' He said, 'Who can save you from me?'
The Prophet said, Allah.' The companions of the Prophet threatened him,
then the Iqama for the prayer was announced and the Prophet offered a
two Rakat Fear prayer with one of the two batches, and that batch went
aside and he offered two Rak'a-t with the other batch. So the Prophet
offered four Rakat but the people offered two Rakat only." (The subnarrator) Abu Bishr added, "The man was Ghaurath bin Al-Harith and the
battle was waged against Muharib Khasafa." Jabir added, "We were with
the Prophet at Nakhl and he offered the Fear prayer." Abu Huraira said, "I
offered the Fear prayer with the Prophet during the Ghazwa (i.e. the battle)
of Najd." Abu Huraira came to the Prophet during the day of Khaibar.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 459:
Narrated Ibn Muhairiz:
I entered the Mosque and saw Abu Said Al-Khudri and sat beside him and
asked him about Al-Azl (i.e. coitus interruptus). Abu Said said, "We went out
with Allah's Apostle for the Ghazwa of Banu Al-Mustaliq and we received
captives from among the Arab captives and we desired women and celibacy
became hard on us and we loved to do coitus interruptus. So when we
intended to do coitus interrupt us, we said, 'How can we do coitus
interruptus before asking Allah's Apostle who is present among us?" We
asked (him) about it and he said, 'It is better for you not to do so, for if any
soul (till the Day of Resurrection) is predestined to exist, it will exist."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 460:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
We took part in the Ghazwa of Najd along with Allah's Apostle and when the
time for the afternoon rest approached while he was in a valley with plenty
of thorny trees, he dismounted under a tree and rested in its shade and
hung his sword (on it). The people dispersed amongst the trees in order to
have shade. While we were in this state, Allah's Apostle called us and we
came and found a bedouin sitting in front of him. The Prophet said, "This
(Bedouin) came to me while I was asleep, and he took my sword stealthily. I
woke up while he was standing by my head, holding my sword without its
sheath. He said, 'Who will save you from me?' I replied, 'Allah.' So he
sheathed it (i.e. the sword) and sat down, and here he is." But Allah's
Apostle did not punish him.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 461:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah Al-Ansari:
I saw the Prophet offering his Nawafil prayer on his Mount facing the East
during the Ghazwa of Anmar.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 462:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Whenever Allah's Apostle intended to go on a journey, he used to draw lots
amongst his wives, and Allah's Apostle used to take with him the one on
whom lot fell. He drew lots amongst us during one of the Ghazwat which he
fought. The lot fell on me and so I proceeded with Allah's Apostle after
Allah's order of veiling (the women) had been revealed. I was carried (on
the back of a camel) in my howdah and carried down while still in it (when
we came to a halt). So we went on till Allah's Apostle had finished from that
Ghazwa of his and returned.
When we approached the city of Medina he announced at night that it was
time for departure. So when they announced the news of departure, I got
up and went away from the army camps, and after finishing from the call of
nature, I came back to my riding animal. I touched my chest to find that my
necklace which was made of Zifar beads (i.e. Yemenite beads partly black
and partly white) was missing. So I returned to look for my necklace and my
search for it detained me. (In the meanwhile) the people who used to carry
me on my camel, came and took my howdah and put it on the back of my
camel on which I used to ride, as they considered that I was in it. In those
days women were light in weight for they did not get fat, and flesh did not
cover their bodies in abundance as they used to eat only a little food. Those
people therefore, disregarded the lightness of the howdah while lifting and
carrying it; and at that time I was still a young girl. They made the camel rise
and all of them left (along with it). I found my necklace after the army had
gone.
Then I came to their camping place to find no call maker of them, nor one
who would respond to the call. So I intended to go to the place where I used
to stay, thinking that they would miss me and come back to me (in my
search). While I was sitting in my resting place, I was overwhelmed by sleep
and slept. Safwan bin Al-Muattal As-Sulami Adh-Dhakwani was behind the
army. When he reached my place in the morning, he saw the figure of a
sleeping person and he recognized me on seeing me as he had seen me
before the order of compulsory veiling (was prescribed). So I woke up when
he recited Istirja' (i.e. "Inna lillahi wa inna llaihi raji'un") as soon as he
recognized me. I veiled my face with my head cover at once, and by Allah,
we did not speak a single word, and I did not hear him saying any word
besides his Istirja'. He dismounted from his camel and made it kneel down,
putting his leg on its front legs and then I got up and rode on it. Then he set
out leading the camel that was carrying me till we overtook the army in the
extreme heat of midday while they were at a halt (taking a rest). (Because
of the event) some people brought destruction upon themselves and the
one who spread the Ifk (i.e. slander) more, was 'Abdullah bin Ubai Ibn
Salul."
(Urwa said, "The people propagated the slander and talked about it in his
(i.e. 'Abdullah's) presence and he confirmed it and listened to it and asked
about it to let it prevail." Urwa also added, "None was mentioned as
members of the slanderous group besides ('Abdullah) except Hassan bin
Thabit and Mistah bin Uthatha and Hamna bint Jahsh along with others
about whom I have no knowledge, but they were a group as Allah said. It is
said that the one who carried most of the slander was 'Abdullah bin Ubai bin
Salul." Urwa added, "'Aisha disliked to have Hassan abused in her presence
and she used to say, 'It was he who said: My father and his (i.e. my father's)
father and my honor are all for the protection of Muhammad's honor from
you.").
'Aisha added, "After we returned to Medina, I became ill for a month. The
people were propagating the forged statements of the slanderers while I
was unaware of anything of all that, but I felt that in my present ailment, I
was not receiving the same kindness from Allah's Apostle as I used to
receive when I got sick. (But now) Allah's Apostle would only come, greet
me and say,' How is that (lady)?' and leave. That roused my doubts, but I did
not discover the evil (i.e. slander) till I went out after my convalescence, I
went out with Um Mistah to Al-Manasi' where we used to answer the call of
nature and we used not to go out (to answer the call of nature) except at
night, and that was before we had latrines near our houses. And this habit of
our concerning evacuating the bowels, was similar to the habits of the old
'Arabs living in the deserts, for it would be troublesome for us to take
latrines near our houses. So I and Um Mistah who was the daughter of Abu
Ruhm bin Al-Muttalib bin Abd Manaf, whose mother was the daughter of
Sakhr bin 'Amir and the aunt of Abu Bakr As-Siddiq and whose son was
Mistah bin Uthatha bin 'Abbas bin Al-Muttalib, went out. I and Um Mistah
returned to my house after we finished answering the call of nature. Um
Mistah stumbled by getting her foot entangled in her covering sheet and on
that she said, 'Let Mistah be ruined!' I said, 'What a hard word you have said.
Do you abuse a man who took part in the battle of Badr?' On that she said,
'O you Hantah! Didn't you hear what he (i.e. Mistah) said? 'I said, 'What did
he say?'
Then she told me the slander of the people of Ifk. So my ailment was
aggravated, and when I reached my home, Allah's Apostle came to me, and
after greeting me, said, 'How is that (lady)?' I said, 'Will you allow me to go
to my parents?' as I wanted to be sure about the news through them. Allah's
Apostle allowed me (and I went to my parents) and asked my mother, 'O
mother! What are the people talking about?' She said, 'O my daughter! Don't
worry, for scarcely is there a charming woman who is loved by her husband
and whose husband has other wives besides herself that they (i.e. women)
would find faults with her.' I said, 'Subhan-Allah! (I testify the uniqueness of
Allah). Are the people really talking in this way?' I kept on weeping that night
till dawn I could neither stop weeping nor sleep then in the morning again, I
kept on weeping. When the Divine Inspiration was delayed.
Allah's Apostle called 'Ali bin Abi Talib and Usama bin Zaid to ask and consult
them about divorcing me. Usama bin Zaid said what he knew of my
innocence, and the respect he preserved in himself for me. Usama said, '(O
Allah's Apostle!) She is your wife and we do not know anything except good
about her.' 'Ali bin Abi Talib said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Allah does not put you in
difficulty and there are plenty of women other than she, yet, ask the maidservant who will tell you the truth.' On that Allah's Apostle called Barira (i.e.
the maid-servant) and said, 'O Barira! Did you ever see anything which
aroused your suspicion?' Barira said to him, 'By Him Who has sent you with
the Truth. I have never seen anything in her (i.e. Aisha) which I would
conceal, except that she is a young girl who sleeps leaving the dough of her
family exposed so that the domestic goats come and eat it.'
So, on that day, Allah's Apostle got up on the pulpit and complained about
'Abdullah bin Ubai (bin Salul) before his companions, saying, 'O you
Muslims! Who will relieve me from that man who has hurt me with his evil
statement about my family? By Allah, I know nothing except good about my
family and they have blamed a man about whom I know nothing except
good and he used never to enter my home except with me.' Sad bin Mu'adh
the brother of Banu 'Abd Al-Ashhal got up and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! I will
relieve you from him; if he is from the tribe of Al-Aus, then I will chop his
head off, and if he is from our brothers, i.e. Al-Khazraj, then order us, and we
will fulfill your order.' On that, a man from Al-Khazraj got up. Um Hassan, his
cousin, was from his branch tribe, and he was Sad bin Ubada, chief of AlKhazraj. Before this incident, he was a pious man, but his love for his tribe
goaded him into saying to Sad (bin Mu'adh). 'By Allah, you have told a lie;
you shall not and cannot kill him. If he belonged to your people, you would
not wish him to be killed.'
On that, Usaid bin Hudair who was the cousin of Sad (bin Mu'adh) got up
and said to Sad bin 'Ubada, 'By Allah! You are a liar! We will surely kill him,
and you are a hypocrite arguing on the behalf of hypocrites.' On this, the
two tribes of Al-Aus and Al Khazraj got so much excited that they were
about to fight while Allah's Apostle was standing on the pulpit. Allah's
Apostle kept on quietening them till they became silent and so did he. All
that day I kept on weeping with my tears never ceasing, and I could never
sleep.
In the morning my parents were with me and I wept for two nights and a
day with my tears never ceasing and I could never sleep till I thought that my
liver would burst from weeping. So, while my parents were sitting with me
and I was weeping, an Ansari woman asked me to grant her admittance. I
allowed her to come in, and when she came in, she sat down and started
weeping with me. While we were in this state, Allah's Apostle came, greeted
us and sat down. He had never sat with me since that day of the slander. A
month had elapsed and no Divine Inspiration came to him about my case.
Allah's Apostle then recited Tashah-hud and then said, 'Amma Badu, O
'Aisha! I have been informed so-and-so about you; if you are innocent, then
soon Allah will reveal your innocence, and if you have committed a sin, then
repent to Allah and ask Him for forgiveness for when a slave confesses his
sins and asks Allah for forgiveness, Allah accepts his repentance.'
When Allah's Apostle finished his speech, my tears ceased flowing
completely that I no longer felt a single drop of tear flowing. I said to my
father, 'Reply to Allah's Apostle on my behalf concerning what he has said.'
My father said, 'By Allah, I do not know what to say to Allah's Apostle .' Then
I said to my mother, 'Reply to Allah's Apostle on my behalf concerning what
he has said.' She said, 'By Allah, I do not know what to say to Allah's
Apostle.' In spite of the fact that I was a young girl and had a little
knowledge of Quran, I said, 'By Allah, no doubt I know that you heard this
(slanderous) speech so that it has been planted in your hearts (i.e. minds)
and you have taken it as a truth. Now if I tell you that I am innocent, you will
not believe me, and if confess to you about it, and Allah knows that I am
innocent, you will surely believe me. By Allah, I find no similitude for me and
you except that of Joseph's father when he said, '(For me) patience in the
most fitting against that which you assert; it is Allah (Alone) Whose Help can
be sought.' Then I turned to the other side and lay on my bed; and Allah
knew then that I was innocent and hoped that Allah would reveal my
innocence. But, by Allah, I never thought that Allah would reveal about my
case, Divine Inspiration, that would be recited (forever) as I considered
myself too unworthy to be talked of by Allah with something of my concern,
but I hoped that Allah's Apostle might have a dream in which Allah would
prove my innocence. But, by Allah, before Allah's Apostle left his seat and
before any of the household left, the Divine inspiration came to Allah's
Apostle.
So there overtook him the same hard condition which used to overtake him,
(when he used to be inspired Divinely). The sweat was dropping from his
body like pearls though it was a wintry day and that was because of the
weighty statement which was being revealed to him. When that state of
Allah's Apostle was over, he got up smiling, and the first word he said was,
'O 'Aisha! Allah has declared your innocence!' Then my Mother said to me,
'Get up and go to him (i.e. Allah's Apostle). I replied, 'By Allah, I will not go
to him, and I praise none but Allah. So Allah revealed the ten Verses:-"Verily! They who spread the slander Are a gang, among you............." (24.1120)
Allah revealed those Quranic Verses to declare my innocence. Abu Bakr AsSiddiq who used to disburse money for Mistah bin Uthatha because of his
relationship to him and his poverty, said, 'By Allah, I will never give to Mistah
bin Uthatha anything after what he has said about Aisha.' Then Allah
revealed:-"And let not those among you who are good and wealthy swear not to give
(any sort of help) to their kinsmen, those in need, and those who have left
their homes for Allah's cause, let them pardon and forgive. Do you not love
that Allah should forgive you? And Allah is oft-Forgiving Most Merciful."
(24.22)
Abu Bakr As-Siddiq said, 'Yes, by Allah, I would like that Allah forgive me.'
and went on giving Mistah the money he used to give him before. He also
added, 'By Allah, I will never deprive him of it at all.'
Aisha further said:." Allah's Apostle also asked Zainab bint Jahsh (i.e. his
wife) about my case. He said to Zainab, 'What do you know and what did
you see?" She replied, "O Allah's Apostle! I refrain from claiming falsely that I
have heard or seen anything. By Allah, I know nothing except good (about
'Aisha).' From amongst the wives of the Prophet Zainab was my peer (in
beauty and in the love she received from the Prophet) but Allah saved her
from that evil because of her piety. Her sister Hamna, started struggling on
her behalf and she was destroyed along with those who were destroyed.
The man who was blamed said, 'Subhan-Allah! By Him in Whose Hand my
soul is, I have never uncovered the cover (i.e. veil) of any female.' Later on
the man was martyred in Allah's Cause."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 463:
Narrated Az-Zuhri:
Al-Walid bin 'Abdul Malik said to me, "Have you heard that 'Ali' was one of
those who slandered 'Aisha?" I replied, "No, but two men from your people
(named) Abu Salama bin 'Abdur-Rahman and Abu Bakr bin Abdur-Rahman
bin Al-Harith have informed me that Aisha told them that 'Ali remained silent
about her case."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 464:
Narrated Masruq bin Al-Aida:
Um Ruman, the mother of 'Aisha said that while 'Aisha and she were sitting,
an Ansari woman came and said, "May Allah harm such and-such a person!"
Um Ruman said to her, What is the matter?" She replied, "My son was
amongst those who talked of the story (of the Slander)." Um Ruman said,
"What is that?" She said, "So-and-so...." and narrated the whole story. On
that 'Aisha said, "Did Allah's Apostle hear about that?" She replies, "yes."
'Aisha further said, "And Abu Bakr too?" She replied, "Yes." On that, 'Aisha
fell down fainting, and when she came to her senses, she had got fever with
rigors. I put her clothes over her and covered her. The Prophet came and
asked, "What is wrong with this (lady)?" Um Ruman replied, "O Allah's
Apostle! She (i.e. 'Aisha) has got temperature with rigors." He said, "Perhaps
it is because of the story that has been talked about?" She said, "Yes." 'Aisha
sat up and said, "By Allah, if I took an oath (that I am innocent), you would
not believe me, and if I said (that I am not innocent), you would not excuse
me. My and your example is like that of Jacob and his sons (as Jacob said ):
'It is Allah (Alone) Whose Help can be sought against that you assert.' Um
Ruman said, "The Prophet then went out saying nothing. Then Allah
declared her innocence. On that, 'Aisha said (to the Prophet), "I thank Allah
only; thank neither anybody else nor you."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 465:
Narrated Ibn Abi Malaika:
'Aisha used to recite this Verse:-- 'Ida taliqunahu bi-alsinatikum' (24.15) "(As
you tell lie with your tongues.)" and used to say "Al-Walaq" means "telling
of a lie. "She knew this Verse more than anybody else as it was revealed
about her.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 466:
Narrated Hisham's father:
I started abusing Hassan in front of 'Aisha. She said, "Do not abuse him as he
used to defend Allah's Apostle (against the infidels). 'Aisha added, "Once
Hassan took the permission from the Prophet to say poetic verses against
the infidels. On that the Prophet said, 'How will you exclude my forefathers
(from that)? Hassan replied, 'I will take you out of them as one takes a hair
out of the dough." Hisham's father added, "I abused Hassan as he was one
of those who spoke against 'Aisha."
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 467:
Narrated Masruq:
We went to 'Aisha while Hassan bin Thabit was with her reciting poetry to
her from some of his poetic verses, saying "A chaste wise lady about whom
nobody can have suspicion. She gets up with an empty stomach because she
never eats the flesh of indiscreet (ladies)." 'Aisha said to him, "But you are
not like that." I said to her, "Why do you grant him admittance, though Allah
said:-- "and as for him among them, who had the greater share therein, his
will be a severe torment." (24.11)
On that, 'Aisha said, "And what punishment is more than blinding?" She,
added, "Hassan used to defend or say poetry on behalf of Allah's Apostle
(against the infidels)."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 468:
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid:
We went out with Allah's Apostle in the year of Al-Hudaibiya. One night it
rained and Allah's Apostle led us in the Fajr prayer and (after finishing it),
turned to us and said, " Do you know what your Lord has said?" We replied,
"Allah and His Apostle know it better." He said, "Allah said:-- "(Some of) My
slaves got up believing in Me, And (some of them) disbelieving in Me. The
one who said: We have been given Rain through Allah's Mercy and Allah's
Blessing and Allah's Bounty, Then he is a believer in Me, and is a Disbeliever
in the star. And whoever said: We have been given rain because of such-andsuch star, Then he is a believer in the star, and is a disbeliever in Me."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 469:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle performed four 'Umras, all in the month of Dhul-Qa'da,
except the one which he performed with his Hajj (i.e. in Dhul-Hijja). He
performed one 'Umra from Al-Hudaibiya in Dhul-Qa'da, another 'Umra in the
following year in Dhul Qa'da a third from Al-Jirana where he distributed the
war booty of Hunain, in Dhul Qa'da, and the fourth 'Umra he performed was
with his Hajj.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 470:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
We set out with the Prophet in the year of Al-Hudaibiya, and all his
companions assumed the state of Ihram but I did not.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 471:
Narrated Al-Bara:
Do you (people) consider the conquest of Mecca, the Victory (referred to in
the Qur'an 48:1). Was the conquest of Mecca a victory? We really consider
that the actual Victory was the Ar-Ridwan Pledge of allegiance which we
gave on the day of Al-Hudaibiya (to the Prophet) . On the day of AlHudaibiya we were fourteen hundred men along with the Prophet AlHudaibiya was a well, the water of which we used up leaving not a single
drop of water in it. When the Prophet was informed of that, he came and sat
on its edge. Then he asked for a utensil of water, performed ablution from
it, rinsed (his mouth), invoked (Allah), and poured the remaining water into
the well. We stayed there for a while and then the well brought forth what
we required of water for ourselves and our riding animals.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 472:
Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib:
That they were in the company of Allah's Apostle on the day of Al-Hudaibiya
and their number was 1400 or more. They camped at a well and drew its
water till it was dried. When they informed Allah's Apostle of that, he came
and sat over its edge and said, "Bring me a bucket of its water." When it was
brought, he spat and invoked (Allah) and said, "Leave it for a while." Then
they quenched their thirst and watered their riding animals (from that well)
till they departed.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 473:
Narrated Salim:
Jabir said "On the day of Al-Hudaibiya, the people felt thirsty and Allah's
Apostle had a utensil containing water. He performer ablution from it and
then the people came towards him. Allah's Apostle said, 'What is wrong
with you?' The people said, 'O Allah's Apostle! We haven't got any water to
perform ablution with or to drink, except what you have in your utensil.' So
the Prophet put his hand in the utensil and the water started spouting out
between his fingers like springs. So we drank and performed ablution." I
said to Jabir, "What was your number on that day?" He replied, "Even if we
had been one hundred thousand, that water would have been sufficient for
us. Anyhow, we were 1500.'

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 474:
Narrated Qatada:
I said to Sa'id bin Al-Musaiyab, "I have been informed that Jabir bin
'Abdullah said that the number (of Al-Hudaibiya Muslim warriors) was 1400."
Sa'id said to me, "Jabir narrated to me that they were 1500 who gave the
Pledge of allegiance to the Prophet on the day of Al-Hudaibiya.'

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 475:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
On the day of Al-Hudaibiya, Allah's Apostle said to us' "You are the best
people on the earth!" We were 1400 then. If I could see now, I would have
shown you the place of the Tree (beneath which the Pledge of allegiance
was given by us)," Salim said, "Our number was 1400." 'Abdullah bin Abi
Aufa said, "The people (who gave the Pledge of allegiance) under the Tree
numbered 1300 and the number of Bani Aslam was 1/8 of the Emigrants."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 476:
Narrated Mirdas Al-Aslami:
Who was among those (who had given the Pledge of allegiance) under the
Tree: Pious people will die in succession, and there will remain the dregs of
society who will be like the useless residues of dates and barley and Allah
will pay no attention to them.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 477:
Narrated Marwan and Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:
The Prophet went out in the company of 1300 to 1500 of his companions in
the year of Al-Hudaibiya, and when they reached Dhul-Hulaifa, he garlanded
and marked his Hadi and assumed the state of Ihram.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 478:
Narrated Kab bin Ujra:
That Allah's Apostle saw him with the lice falling (from his head) on his face.
Allah's Apostle said, "Are your lice troubling you? Ka'b said, "Yes." Allah's
Apostle thus ordered him to shave his head while he was at Al-Hudaibiya. Up
to then there was no indication that all of them would finish their state of
Ihram and they hoped that they would enter Mecca. Then the order of AlFidya was revealed, so Allah's Apostle ordered Kab to feed six poor persons
with one Faraq of food or slaughter a sheep or fast for three days.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 479:
Narrated Aslam:
Once I went with 'Umar bin Al-Khattab to the market. A young woman
followed 'Umar and said, "O chief of the believers! My husband has died,
leaving little children. By Allah, they have not even a sheep's trotter to cook;
they have no farms or animals. I am afraid that they may die because of
hunger, and I am the daughter of Khufaf bin Ima Al-Ghafari, and my father
witnessed the Pledge of allegiance) of Al-Hudaibiya with the Prophet.' Umar
stopped and did not proceed, and said, "I welcome my near relative." Then
he went towards a strong camel which was tied in the house, and carried on
to it, two sacks he had loaded with food grains and put between them
money and clothes and gave her its rope to hold and said, "Lead it, and this
provision will not finish till Allah gives you a good supply." A man said, "O
chief of the believers! You have given her too much." "Umar said
disapprovingly. "May your mother be bereaved of you! By Allah, I have seen
her father and brother besieging a fort for a long time and conquering it,
and then we were discussing what their shares they would have from that
war booty."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 480:
Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab:
That his father said, "I saw the Tree (of the Ar-Ridwan Pledge of allegiance
and when I returned to it later, I was not able to recognize it. (The sub-narrator MahmiJd said, Al-Musaiyab said, 'Then; forgot it (i.e., the Tree).)"

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 481:
Narrated Tariq bin 'Abdur-Rahman:
When I set out for Hajj, I passed by some people offering a prayer, I asked,
"What is this mosque?" They said, "This is the Tree where Allah's Apostle
took the Ar-Ridwan Pledge of allegiance. Then I went to Sa'id bin Musaiyab
and informed him about it. Said said, "My father said that he was amongst
those who had given the Pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle beneath the
Tree. He (i.e. my father) said, "When we set out the following year, we
forgot the Tree and were unable to recognize it. "Then Said said (perhaps
ironically) "The companions of the Prophet could not recognize it;
nevertheless, you do recognize it; therefore you have a better knowledge."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 482:
Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab:
That his father was amongst those who had given the Pledge of allegiance
(to the Prophet ) beneath the Tree, and the next year when they went
towards the Tree, they were not able to recognize it.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 483:
Narrated Tariq:
(The tree where the Ridwan Pledge of allegiance was taken by the Prophet)
was mentioned before Said bin Al-Musaiyab. On that he smiled and said,
"My father informed me (about it) and he had witnessed it (i.e. the Pledge)
."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 484:
Narrated Abdullah bin Abi Aufa:
(Who was one of those who had given the Pledge of allegiance to the
Prophet beneath the Tree) When the people brought Sadaqa (i.e. Rakat) to
the Prophet he used to say, "O Allah! Bless them with your Mercy." Once my
father came with his Sadaqa to him whereupon he (i.e. the Prophet) said. "O
Allah! Bless the family of Abu Aufa."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 485:
Narrated 'Abbas bin Tamim
When it was the day (of the battle) of Al-Harra the people were giving
Pledge of allegiance to Abdullah bin Hanzala. Ibn Zaid said, "For what are
the people giving Pledge of allegiance to Abdullah bin Hanzala?" It was said
to him, "For death." Ibn Zaid said, "I will never give the Pledge of allegiance
for that to anybody else after Allah's Apostle ." Ibn Zaid was one of those
who had witnessed the day of Al-Hudaibiya with the Prophet.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 486:
Narrated Iyas bin Salama bin Al-Akwa:
My father who was amongst those who had given the Pledge of allegiance
to the Prophet beneath the Tree, said to me, "We used to offer the Jumua
prayer with the Prophet and then depart at a time when the walls had no
shade for us to take shelter in."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 487:
Narrated Yazid bin Abi Ubaid:
I said to Salama bin Al-Akwa, "For what did you give the Pledge of allegiance
to Allah's Apostle on the day of Al-Hudaibiya?" He replied, "For death (in the
Cause of Islam.)."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 488:
Narrated Al-Musaiyab:
I met Al-Bara bin 'Azib and said (to him). "May you live prosperously! You
enjoyed the company of the Prophet and gave him the Pledge of allegiance
(of Al-Hudaibiya) under the Tree." On that, Al-Bara' said, "O my nephew! You
do not know what we have done after him (i.e. his death)."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 489:
Narrated Abu Qilaba:
that Thabit bin Ad-Dahhak had informed him that he was one of those who
had given the Pledge of allegiance (of Al-Hudaibiya) beneath the Tree.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 490:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
regarding Allah's Statement: "Verily! We have granted you (O, Muhammad)
Manifest victory." (48.1) It refers to the Al-Hudaibiya Pledge. And the
companions of the Prophet said (to the Prophet), "Congratulations and
happiness for you; but what reward shall we get?" So Allah revealed:-- "That
He may admit the believing men and women to gardens beneath which
rivers flow." (48.5)

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 491:
Narrated Zahir Al-Aslami:
(who was one of those who had witnessed (the Pledge of allegiance
beneath) the Tree) While I was making fire beneath the cooking pots
containing donkey's meat, the announcer of Allah's Apostle announced,
"Allah's Apostle forbids you to eat donkey's meat."
The same narration was told by Majzaa from a man called Uhban bin Aus
who was one of those who had witnessed (the Pledge of allegiance
beneath) the Tree., and who had some trouble in his knee so that while
doing prostrations, he used to put a pillow underneath his knee.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 492:
Narrated Suwaid bin An-Numan:
who was one of those who witnessed (the Pledge of allegiance beneath)
the Tree: Allah's Apostle and his companions were given Sawiq and they
chewed it.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 493:
Narrated Abu Jamra:
I asked Aidh bin Amr, who was one of the companions of the Prophet one of
those (who gave the allegiance to the Prophet the Tree: "Can the Witr
prayer be repeated (in one night)?" He said, "If you have offered it in the
first part of the night, you should not repeat it in the last part 'of the night."
(See Fateh-al-Bari page 458 Vol 8th).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 494:
Narrated Zaid bin Aslam:
My father said, "Allah's Apostle was proceeding at night on one of his
journeys and 'Umar bin Al-Khattab was going along with him. 'Umar bin AlKhattab asked him (about something) but Allah's Apostle did not answer
him. 'Umar asked him again, but he did not answer him. He asked him again
(for the third time) but he did not answer him. On that Umar bin Al-Khattab
addressed himself saying, "May your mother be bereaved of you, O 'Umar,
for you have asked Allah's Apostle thrice, yet he has not answered you."
'Umar said, "Then I made my camel run fast and took it in front of the other
Muslims, and I was afraid that something might be revealed in my
connection. I had hardly waited for a moment when I heard somebody
calling me. I said, 'I was afraid that something might have been revealed
about me.' Then I came to Allah's Apostle and greeted him. He (i.e. the
Prophet) said, 'Tonight there has been revealed to me, a Sura which is
dearer to me than (all the world) on which the sun rises,' and then he
recited: 'Verily! We have granted you (O Muhammad) A manifest victory."
(48.1)
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 495:
Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama and Marwan bin Al-Hakam:
(one of them said more than his friend): The Prophet set out in the company
of more than one-thousand of his companions in the year of Al-Hudaibiya,
and when he reached Dhul-Hulaifa, he garlanded his Hadi (i.e. sacrificing
animal), assumed the state of Ihram for 'Umra from that place and sent a
spy of his from Khuzi'a (tribe). The Prophet proceeded on till he reached (a
village called) Ghadir-al-Ashtat. There his spy came and said, "The Quraish
(infidels) have collected a great number of people against you, and they
have collected against you the Ethiopians, and they will fight with you, and
will stop you from entering the Ka'ba and prevent you." The Prophet said,
"O people! Give me your opinion. Do you recommend that I should destroy
the families and offspring of those who want to stop us from the Ka'ba? If
they should come to us (for peace) then Allah will destroy a spy from the
pagans, or otherwise we will leave them in a miserable state." On that Abu
Bakr said, "O Allah Apostle! You have come with the intention of visiting this
House (i.e. Ka'ba) and you do not want to kill or fight anybody. So proceed
to it, and whoever should stop us from it, we will fight him." On that the
Prophet said, "Proceed on, in the Name of Allah !"

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 496:
Narrated Urwa bin Az-Zubair:
That he heard Marwan bin Al-Hakam and Al-Miswar bin Makhrama relating
one of the events that happened to Allah's Apostle in the 'Umra of AlHudaibiya. They said, "When Allah's Apostle concluded the truce with Suhail
bin 'Amr on the day of Al-Hudaibiya, one of the conditions which Suhail bin
'Amr stipulated, was his saying (to the Prophet), "If anyone from us (i.e.
infidels) ever comes to you, though he has embraced your religion, you
should return him to us, and should not interfere between us and him."
Suhail refused to conclude the truce with Allah's Apostle except on this
condition. The believers disliked this condition and got disgusted with it and
argued about it. But when Suhail refused to conclude the truce with Allah's
Apostle except on that condition, Allah's Apostle concluded it. Accordingly,
Allah's Apostle then returned Abu Jandal bin Suhail to his father, Suhail bin
'Amr, and returned every man coming to him from them during that period
even if he was a Muslim. The believing women Emigrants came (to Medina)
and Um Kulthum, the daughter of 'Uqba bin Abi Mu'ait was one of those
who came to Allah's Apostle and she was an adult at that time. Her relatives
came, asking Allah's Apostle to return her to them, and in this connection,
Allah revealed the Verses dealing with the believing (women). Aisha said,
"Allah's Apostle used to test all the believing women who migrated to him,
with the following Verse:-- "O Prophet! When the believing Women come to
you, to give the pledge of allegiance to you." (60.12)
'Urwa's uncle said, "We were informed when Allah ordered His Apostle to
return to the pagans what they had given to their wives who lately migrated
(to Medina) and we were informed that Abu Basir..." relating the whole
narration.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 497:
Narrated Nafi:
Abdullah bin Umar set out for Umra during the period of afflictions, and he
said, "If I should be stopped from visiting the Kaba, I will do what we did
when we were with Allah's Apostle." He assumed Ihram for 'Umra in the
year of Al-Hudaibiya.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 498:
Narrated Nafi:
Ibn 'Umar assumed Ihram and said, "If something should intervene between
me and the Ka'ba, then I will do what the Prophet did when the Quraish
infidels intervened between him and (the Ka'ba). Then Ibn 'Umar recited:
"You have indeed in Allah's Apostle A good example to follow." (33.21)
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 499:
Narrated Nafi:
One of 'Abdullah's sons said to 'Abdullah (bin Umar) "I wish you would stay
this year (and not perform Hajj) as I am afraid that you will not be able to
reach the Kaba." On that he (i.e. 'Abdullah bin Umar) said, "We went out
with the Prophet (for 'Umra), and when the Quraish infidel intervened
between us and the Ka'ba, the Prophet slaughtered his Hadi and shaved (his
head), and his companions cut short their hair." Then 'Abdullah bin Umar
said, "I make you witness that I have intended to perform 'Umra and if I am
allowed to reach the Kaba, I will perform the Tawaf, and if something (i.e.
obstacles) intervene between me and the Kaba, then I will do what Allah's
Apostle did." Then after going for a while, he said, "I consider the
ceremonies (of both 'Umra and Hajj as one and the same, so I would like you
to witness that I have intended to perform Hajj along with my 'Umra." So he
performed only one Tawaf and one Sai (between Safa and Marwa) and
finished the Ihram of both Umra and Hajj).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 500:
Narrated Nafi:
The people used to say that Ibn 'Umar had embraced Islam before 'Umar.
This is not true. What happened is that 'Umar sent 'Abdullah to bring his
horse from an Ansari man so as to fight on it. At that time the people were
giving the Pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle near the Tree, and 'Umar
was not aware of that. So Abdullah (bin Umar) gave the Pledge of Allegiance
(to the Prophet) and went to take the horse and brought it to 'Umar. While
'Umar was putting on the armor to get ready for fighting, 'Abdullah
informed him that the people were giving the Pledge of allegiance to Allah's
Apostle beneath the Tree. So 'Umar set out and 'Abdullah accompanied him
till he gave the Pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle, and it was this event
that made people say that Ibn 'Umar had embraced Islam before 'Umar.
"Abdullah bin 'Umar added, "The people were along with the Prophet on
the day of Al-Hudaibiya spreading in the shade of the trees. Suddenly the
people surrounded the Prophet and started looking at him." 'Umar said, "O
'Abdullah! Go and see why the people are encircling Allah's Apostle and
looking at him." 'Abdullah bin Umar then saw the people giving the Pledge o
allegiance to the Prophet. So he also gave the Pledge of allegiance and
returned to 'Umar who went out in his turn and gave the Pledge of
allegiance to the Prophet.'

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 501:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa:
We were in the company of the Prophet when he performed the 'Umra. He
performed the Tawaf and we did the same; he offered the prayer and we
also offered the prayer with him. Then he performed the Sai between Safa
and Marwa and we were guarding him against the people of Mecca so that
nobody should harm him.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 502:
Narrated Abu Wail:
When Sahl bin Hunaif returned from (the battle of) Siffin, we went to ask
him (as to why he had come back). He replied, "(You should not consider me
a coward) but blame your opinions. I saw myself on the day of Abu Jandal
(inclined to fight), and if I had the power of refusing the order of Allah's
Apostle then, I would have refused it (and fought the infidels bravely). Allah
and His Apostle know (what is convenient) better. Whenever we put our
swords on our shoulders for any matter that terrified us, our swords led us
to an easy agreeable solution before the present situation (of disagreement
and dispute between the Muslims). When we mend the breach in one side, it
opened in another, and we do not know what to do about it."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 503:
Narrated Kab bin Ujra:
The Prophet came to me at the time of Al-Hudaibiya Pledge while lice were
falling on my face. He said, "Are the lice of your head troubling you?" I said,
"Yes." He said, "Shave your head and fast for three days, or feed six poor
persons, or slaughter a sheep as sacrifice." (The sub-narrator, Aiyub said, "I
do not know with which of these three options he started.")

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 504:
Narrated Ka'b bin Ujra:
We were in the company of Allah's Apostle at Al-Hudaibiya in the state of
Ihram and the pagans did not allow us to proceed (to the Ka'ba). I had thick
hair and lice started falling on my face. The Prophet passed by me and said,
"Are the lice of your head troubling you?" I replied, Yes." (The sub-narrator
added, "Then the following Divine Verse was revealed:-- "And if anyone of
you is ill or has an ailment in his scalp, (necessitating shaving) must pay a
ransom (Fida) of either fasting or feeding the poor, Or offering a sacrifice."
(2.196)

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 505:
Narrated Anas:
Some people of the tribe of 'Ukl and 'Uraina arrived at Medina to meet the
Prophet and embraced Islam and said, "O Allah's Prophet! We are the
owners of milch livestock (i.e. bedouins) and not farmers (i.e. countrymen)."
They found the climate of Medina unsuitable for them. So Allah's Apostle
ordered that they should be provided with some milch camels and a
shepherd and ordered them to go out of Medina and to drink the camels'
milk and urine (as medicine) So they set out and when they reached AlHarra, they reverted to Heathenism after embracing Islam, and killed the
shepherd of the Prophet and drove away the camels. When this news
reached the Prophet, he sent some people in pursuit of them. (So they were
caught and brought back to the Prophet ). The Prophet gave his orders in
their concern. So their eyes were branded with pieces of iron and their
hands and legs were cut off and they were left away in Harra till they died in
that state of theirs. (See Hadith 234 Vol 1)

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 506:
Narrated Abu Raja:
The freed slave of Abu Qilaba, who was with Abu Qilaba in Sham: 'Umar bin
'Abdul 'Aziz consulted the people saying, "What do you think of Qasama."
They said, "'It is a right (judgment) which Allah's Apostle and the Caliphs
before you acted on." Abu Qilaba was behind 'Umar's bed. 'Anbasa bin Said
said, But what about the narration concerning the people of Uraina?" Abu
Qilaba said, "Anas bin Malik narrated it to me," and then narrated the whole
story.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 507:
Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa:
Once I went (from Medina) towards (Al-Ghaba) before the first Adhan of the
Fajr Prayer. The she-camels of Allah's Apostle used to graze at a place called
Dhi-Qarad. A slave of 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf met me (on the way) and said,
"The she-camels of Allah's Apostle had been taken away by force." I asked,
"Who had taken them?" He replied "(The people of) Ghatafan." I made three
loud cries (to the people of Medina) saying, "O Sabahah!" I made the people
between the two mountains of Medina hear me. Then I rushed onward and
caught up with the robbers while they were watering the camels. I started
throwing arrows at them as I was a good archer and I was saying, "I am the
son of Al-Akwa', and today will perish the wicked people." I kept on saying
like that till I restored the she-camels (of the Prophet), I also snatched thirty
Burda (i.e. garments) from them. Then the Prophet and the other people
came there, and I said, "O Allah's Prophet! I have stopped the people (of
Ghatafan) from taking water and they are thirsty now. So send (some
people) after them now." On that the Prophet said, "O the son of Al-Akwa'!
You have over-powered them, so forgive them." Then we all came back and
Allah's Apostle seated me behind him on his she-camel till we entered
Medina.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 508:
Narrated Suwaid bin An-Numan:
I went out in the company of the Prophet in the year of Khaibar, and when
we reached As Sahba' which is the lower part of Khaibar, the Prophet
offered the Asr prayer and then asked the people to collect the journey
food. Nothing was brought but Sawiq which the Prophet ordered to be
moistened with water, and then he ate it and we also ate it. Then he got up
to offer the Maghrib prayer. He washed his mouth, and we too washed our
mouths, and then he offered the prayer without repeating his abulution.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 509:
Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa:
We went out to Khaibar in the company of the Prophet. While we were
proceeding at night, a man from the group said to 'Amir, "O 'Amir! Won't
you let us hear your poetry?" 'Amir was a poet, so he got down and started
reciting for the people poetry that kept pace with the camels' footsteps,
saying:-- "O Allah! Without You we Would not have been guided On the right
path Neither would be have given In charity, nor would We have prayed. So
please forgive us, what we have committed (i.e. our defects); let all of us Be
sacrificed for Your Cause And send Sakina (i.e. calmness) Upon us to make
our feet firm When we meet our enemy, and If they will call us towards An
unjust thing, We will refuse. The infidels have made a hue and Cry to ask
others' help Against us." The Prophet on that, asked, "Who is that (camel)
driver (reciting poetry)?" The people said, "He is 'Amir bin Al-Akwa'."
Then the Prophet said, "May Allah bestow His Mercy on him." A man
amongst the people said, "O Allah's Prophet! has (martyrdom) been granted
to him. Would that you let us enjoy his company longer." Then we reached
and besieged Khaibar till we were afflicted with severe hunger. Then Allah
helped the Muslims conquer it (i.e. Khaibar). In the evening of the day of the
conquest of the city, the Muslims made huge fires. The Prophet said, "What
are these fires? For cooking what, are you making the fire?" The people
replied, "(For cooking) meat." He asked, "What kind of meat?" They (i.e.
people) said, "The meat of donkeys." The Prophet said, "Throw away the
meat and break the pots!" Some man said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall we
throw away the meat and wash the pots instead?" He said, "(Yes, you can
do) that too." So when the army files were arranged in rows (for the clash),
'Amir's sword was short and he aimed at the leg of a Jew to strike it, but the
sharp blade of the sword returned to him and injured his own knee, and that
caused him to die. When they returned from the battle, Allah's Apostle saw
me (in a sad mood). He took my hand and said, "What is bothering you?" I
replied, "Let my father and mother be sacrificed for you! The people say that
the deeds of 'Amir are lost." The Prophet said, "Whoever says so, is
mistaken, for 'Amir has got a double reward." The Prophet raised two
fingers and added, "He (i.e. Amir) was a persevering struggler in the Cause
of Allah and there are few 'Arabs who achieved the like of (good deeds)
'Amir had done."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 510:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle reached Khaibar at night and it was his habit that, whenever
he reached the enemy at night, he will not attack them till it was morning.
When it was morning, the Jews came out with their spades and baskets, and
when they saw him(i.e. the Prophet ), they said, "Muhammad! By Allah!
Muhammad and his army!" The Prophet said, "Khaibar is destroyed, for
whenever we approach a (hostile) nation (to fight), then evil will be the
morning for those who have been warned."
Narrated Anas bin Malik: We reached Khaibar early in the morning and the
inhabitants of Khaibar came out carrying their spades, and when they saw
the Prophet they said, "Muhammad! By Allah! Muhammad and his army!"
The Prophet said, "Allahu-Akbar! Khaibar is destroyed, for whenever we
approach a (hostile) nation (to fight) then evil will be the morning for those
who have been warned." We then got the meat of donkeys (and intended to
eat it), but an announcement was made by the announcer of the Prophet,
"Allah and His Apostle forbid you to eat the meat of donkeys as it is an
impure thing."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 511:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Someone came to Allah's Apostles and said, "The donkeys have been eaten
(by the Muslims)." The Prophet kept quiet. Then the man came again and
said, "The donkeys have been eaten." The Prophet kept quiet. The man
came to him the third time and said, "The donkeys have been consumed."
On that the Prophet ordered an announcer to announce to the people,
"Allah and His Apostle forbid you to eat the meat of donkeys." Then the
cooking pots were upset while the meat was still boiling in them.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 512:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet offered the Fajr Prayer near Khaibar when it was still dark and
then said, "Allahu-Akbar! Khaibar is destroyed, for whenever we approach a
(hostile) nation (to fight), then evil will be the morning for those who have
been warned." Then the inhabitants of Khaibar came out running on the
roads. The Prophet had their warriors killed, their offspring and woman
taken as captives. Safiya was amongst the captives, She first came in the
share of Dahya Alkali but later on she belonged to the Prophet . The Prophet
made her manumission as her 'Mahr'.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 513:
Narrated 'Abdul 'Aziz bin Suhaib:
Anas bin Malik said, "The Prophet took Safiya as a captive. He manumitted
her and married her." Thabit asked Anas, "What did he give her as Mahr (i.e.
marriage gift)?" Anas replied. "Her Mahr was herself, for he manumitted
her."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 514:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad As Saidi:
Allah's Apostle (and his army) encountered the pagans and the two armies.,,
fought and then Allah's Apostle returned to his army camps and the others
(i.e. the enemy) returned to their army camps. Amongst the companions of
the Prophet there was a man who could not help pursuing any single
isolated pagan to strike him with his sword. Somebody said, "None has
benefited the Muslims today more than so-and-so." On that Allah's Apostle
said, "He is from the people of the Hell-Fire certainly." A man amongst the
people (i.e. Muslims) said, "I will accompany him (to know the fact)." So he
went along with him, and whenever he stopped he stopped with him, and
whenever he hastened, he hastened with him. The (brave) man then got
wounded severely, and seeking to die at once, he planted his sword into the
ground and put its point against his chest in between his breasts, and then
threw himself on it and committed suicide. On that the person (who was
accompanying the deceased all the time) came to Allah's Apostle and said, "I
testify that you are the Apostle of Allah." The Prophet said, "Why is that
(what makes you say so)?" He said "It is concerning the man whom you have
already mentioned as one of the dwellers of the Hell-Fire. The people were
surprised by your statement, and I said to them, "I will try to find out the
truth about him for you." So I went out after him and he was then inflicted
with a severe wound and because of that, he hurried to bring death upon
himself by planting the handle of his sword into the ground and directing its
tip towards his chest between his breasts, and then he threw himself over it
and committed suicide." Allah's Apostle then said, "A man may do what
seem to the people as the deeds of the dwellers of Paradise but he is from
the dwellers of the Hell-Fire and another may do what seem to the people as
the deeds of the dwellers of the Hell-Fire, but he is from the dwellers of
Paradise."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 515:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
We witnessed (the battle of) Khaibar. Allah's Apostle said about one of
those who were with him and who claimed to be a Muslim. "This (man) is
from the dwellers of the Hell-Fire." When the battle started, that fellow
fought so violently and bravely that he received plenty of wounds. Some of
the people were about to doubt (the Prophet's statement), but the man,
feeling the pain of his wounds, put his hand into his quiver and took out of
it, some arrows with which he slaughtered himself (i.e. committed suicide).
Then some men amongst the Muslims came hurriedly and said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Allah has made your statement true so-and-so has committed
suicide. "The Prophet said, "O so-and-so! Get up and make an
announcement that none but a believer will enter Paradise and that Allah
may support the religion with an unchaste (evil) wicked man.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 516:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari:
When Allah's Apostle fought the battle of Khaibar, or when Allah's Apostle
went towards it, (whenever) the people, (passed over a high place
overlooking a valley, they raised their voices saying, "Allahu-Akbar! AllahuAkbar! None has the right to be worshipped except Allah." On that Allah's
Apostle said (to them), "Lower your voices, for you are not calling a deaf or
an absent one, but you are calling a Hearer Who is near and is with you." I
was behind the riding animal of Allah's Apostle and he heard me saying.
"There Is neither might, nor power but with Allah," On that he said to me,
"O Abdullah bin Qais!" I said, "Labbaik. O Allah's Apostle!" He said, "Shall I
tell you a sentence which is one of the treasures of Paradise" I said, "Yes, O
Allah's Apostle! Let my father and mother be sacrificed for your sake." He
said, "It is: There is neither might nor power but with Allah."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 517:
Narrated Yazid bin Abi Ubaid:
I saw the trace of a wound in Salama's leg. I said to him, "O Abu Muslim!
What is this wound?" He said, "This was inflicted on me on the day of
Khaibar and the people said, 'Salama has been wounded.' Then I went to the
Prophet and he puffed his saliva in it (i.e. the wound) thrice., and since then I
have not had any pain in it till this hour."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 518:
Narrated Sahl:
During one of his Ghazawat, the Prophet encountered the pagans, and the
two armies fought, and then each of them returned to their army camps.
Amongst the (army of the) Muslims there was a man who would follow
every pagan separated from the army and strike him with his sword. It was
said, "O Allah's Apostle! None has fought so satisfactorily as so-and-so
(namely, that brave Muslim). "The Prophet said, "He is from the dwellers of
the Hell-Fire." The people said, "Who amongst us will be of the dwellers of
Paradise if this (man) is from the dwellers of the Hell-Fire?" Then a man from
amongst the people said, "I will follow him and accompany him in his fast
and slow movements." The (brave) man got wounded, and wanting to die at
once, he put the handle of his sword on the ground and its tip in between
his breasts, and then threw himself over it, committing suicide. Then the
man (who had watched the deceased) returned to the Prophet and said, "I
testify that you are Apostle of Allah." The Prophet said, "What is this?" The
man told him the whole story. The Prophet said, "A man may do what may
seem to the people as the deeds of the dwellers of Paradise, but he is of the
dwellers of the Hell-Fire and a man may do what may seem to the people as
the deeds of the dwellers of the Hell-Fire, but he is from the dwellers of
Paradise."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 519:
Narrated Abu Imran:
Anas looked at the people wearing Tailsans (i.e. a special kind of head
covering worn by Jews in old days). On that Anas said, "At this moment they
(i.e. those people) look like the Jews of Khaibar."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 520:
Narrated Salama:
Ali remained behind the Prophet during the Ghazwa of Khaibar as he was
suffering from eye trouble. He then said, "(How can) I remain behind the
Prophet ," and followed him. So when he slept on the night of the conquest
of Khaibar, the Prophet said, "I will give the flag tomorrow, or tomorrow the
flag will be taken by a man who is loved by Allah and His Apostle , and
(Khaibar) will be conquered through him, (with Allah's help)" While every
one of us was hopeful to have the flag, it was said, "Here is 'Ali" and the
Prophet gave him the flag and Khaibar was conquered through him (with
Allah's Help).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 521:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
On the day of Khaibar, Allah's Apostle said, "Tomorrow I will give this flag to
a man through whose hands Allah will give us victory. He loves Allah and His
Apostle, and he is loved by Allah and His Apostle." The people remained that
night, wondering as to who would be given it. In the morning the people
went to Allah's Apostle and everyone of them was hopeful to receive it (i.e.
the flag). The Prophet said, "Where is Ali bin Abi Talib?" It was said, "He is
suffering from eye trouble O Allah's Apostle." He said, "Send for him." 'Ali
was brought and Allah's Apostle spat in his eye and invoked good upon him.
So 'Ali was cured as if he never had any trouble. Then the Prophet gave him
the flag. 'Ali said "O Allah's Apostle! I will fight with them till they become
like us." Allah's Apostle said, "Proceed and do not hurry. When you enter
their territory, call them to embrace Islam and inform them of Allah's Rights
which they should observe, for by Allah, even if a single man is led on the
right path (of Islam) by Allah through you, then that will be better for you
than the nice red camels.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 522:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
We arrived at Khaibar, and when Allah helped His Apostle to open the fort,
the beauty of Safiya bint Huyai bin Akhtaq whose husband had been killed
while she was a bride, was mentioned to Allah's Apostle. The Prophet
selected her for himself, and set out with her, and when we reached a place
called Sidd-as-Sahba,' Safiya became clean from her menses then Allah's
Apostle married her. Hais (i.e. an 'Arabian dish) was prepared on a small
leather mat. Then the Prophet said to me, "I invite the people around you."
So that was the marriage banquet of the Prophet and Safiya. Then we
proceeded towards Medina, and I saw the Prophet, making for her a kind of
cushion with his cloak behind him (on his camel). He then sat beside his
camel and put his knee for Safiya to put her foot on, in order to ride (on the
camel).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 523:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet stayed with Safiya bint Huyai for three days on the way of
Khaibar where he consummated his marriage with her. Safiya was amongst
those who were ordered to use a veil.
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 524:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet stayed for three rights between Khaibar and Medina and was
married to Safiya. I invited the Muslim to h s marriage banquet and there wa
neither meat nor bread in that banquet but the Prophet ordered Bilal to
spread the leather mats on which dates, dried yogurt and butter were put.
The Muslims said amongst themselves, "Will she (i.e. Safiya) be one of the
mothers of the believers, (i.e. one of the wives of the Prophet ) or just (a
lady captive) of what his right-hand possesses" Some of them said, "If the
Prophet makes her observe the veil, then she will be one of the mothers of
the believers (i.e. one of the Prophet's wives), and if he does not make her
observe the veil, then she will be his lady slave." So when he departed, he
made a place for her behind him (on his and made her observe the veil.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 525:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mughaffal:
While we were besieging Khaibar, a person threw a leather container
containing some fat and I ran to take it. Suddenly I looked behind, and
behold! The Prophet was there. So I felt shy (to take it then).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 526:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
On the day of Khaiber, Allah's Apostle forbade the eating of garlic and the
meat of donkeys.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 527:
Narrated 'Ali bin Abi Talib:
On the day of Khaibar, Allah's Apostle forbade the Mut'a (i.e. temporary
marriage) and the eating of donkey-meat.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 528:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
On the day of Khaibar, Allah's Apostle forbade the eating of donkey meat.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 529:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
Allah's Apostle forbade the eating of donkey-meat.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 530:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
On the day of Khaibar, Allah's Apostle forbade the eating of donkey meat
and allowed the eating of horse meat.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 531:
Narrated Ibn Abi Aufa:
We where afflicted with severe hunger on the day of Khaibar. While the
cooking pots were boiling and some of the food was well-cooked, the
announcer of the Prophet came to say, "Do not eat anything the donkeymeat and upset the cooking pots." We then thought that the Prophet had
prohibited such food because the Khumus had not been taken out of it.
Some others said, "He prohibited the meat of donkeys from the point of
view of principle, because donkeys used to eat dirty things."
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 532:
Narrated Al-Bara and 'Abdullah bin Abl Aufa:
That when they were in the company of the Prophet, they got some
donkeys which they (slaughtered and) cooked. Then the announcer of the
Prophet said, "Turn the cooking pots upside down (i.e. throw out the
meat)."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 533:
Narrated Al-Bara' and Ibn Abi Aufa:
On the day of Khaibar when the cooking pots were put on the fire, the
Prophet said, "Turn the cooking pots upside down."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 534:
Narrated Al-Bara:
We took part in a Ghazwa with the Prophet (same as Hadith No. 533).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 535:
Narrated Al-Bara Bin Azib:
During the Ghazwa of Khaibar, the Prophet ordered us to throw away the
meat of the donkeys whether it was still raw or cooked. He did not allow us
to eat it later on.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 536:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
I do not know whether the Prophet forbade the eating of donkey-meat
(temporarily) because they were the beasts of burden for the people, and
he disliked that their means of transportation should be lost, or he forbade
it on the day of Khaibar permanently.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 537:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
On the day of Khaibar, Allah's Apostle divided (the war booty of Khaibar)
with the ratio of two shares for the horse and one-share for the foot soldier.
(The sub-narrator, Nafi' explained this, saying, "If a man had a horse, he was
given three shares and if he had no horse, then he was given one share.")

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 538:
Narrated Jubair bin Mutim:
Uthman bin 'Affan and I went to the Prophet and said, "You had given Banu
Al-Muttalib from the Khumus of Khaibar's booty and left us in spite of the
fact that we and Banu Al-Muttalib are similarly related to you." The Prophet
said, "Banu Hashim and Banu Al-Muttalib only are one and the same." So the
Prophet did not give anything to Banu Abd Shams and Banu Nawfal.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 539:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The news of the migration of the Prophet (from Mecca to Medina) reached
us while we were in Yemen. So we set out as emigrants towards him. We
were (three) I and my two brothers. I was the youngest of them, and one of
the two was Abu Burda, and the other, Abu Ruhm, and our total number
was either 53 or 52 men from my people. We got on board a boat and our
boat took us to Negus in Ethiopia. There we met Ja'far bin Abi Talib and
stayed with him. Then we all came (to Medina) and met the Prophet at the
time of the conquest of Khaibar. Some of the people used to say to us,
namely the people of the ship, "We have migrated before you." Asma' bint
'Umais who was one of those who had come with us, came as a visitor to
Hafsa, the wife the Prophet . She had migrated along with those other
Muslims who migrated to Negus. 'Umar came to Hafsa while Asma' bint
'Umais was with her. 'Umar, on seeing Asma,' said, "Who is this?" She said,
"Asma' bint 'Umais," 'Umar said, "Is she the Ethiopian? Is she the sea-faring
lady?" Asma' replied, "Yes." 'Umar said, "We have migrated before you
(people of the boat), so we have got more right than you over Allah's
Apostle " On that Asma' became angry and said, "No, by Allah, while you
were with Allah's Apostle who was feeding the hungry ones amongst you,
and advised the ignorant ones amongst you, we were in the far-off hated
land of Ethiopia, and all that was for the sake of Allah's Apostle . By Allah, I
will neither eat any food nor drink anything till I inform Allah's Apostle of all
that you have said. There we were harmed and frightened. I will mention
this to the Prophet and will not tell a lie or curtail your saying or add
something to it." So when the Prophet came, she said, "O Allah's Prophet
'Umar has said so-and-so." He said (to Asma'), "What did you say to him?"
Asma's aid, "I told him so-and-so." The Prophet said, "He (i.e. 'Umar) has not
got more right than you people over me, as he and his companions have
(the reward of) only one migration, and you, the people of the boat, have
(the reward of) two migrations." Asma' later on said, "I saw Abu Musa and
the other people of the boat coming to me in successive groups, asking me
about this narration,, and to them nothing in the world was more cheerful
and greater than what the Prophet had said about them."
Narrated Abu Burda: Asma' said, "I saw Abu Musa requesting me to repeat
this narration again and again."
Narrated Abu Burda: Abu Musa said, "The Prophet said, "I recognize the
voice of the group of Al-Ashariyun, when they recite the Qur'an, when they
enter their homes at night, and I recognize their houses by (listening) to
their voices when they are reciting the Qur'an at night although I have not
seen their houses when they came to them during the day time. Amongst
them is Hakim who, on meeting the cavalry or the enemy, used to say to
them (i.e. the enemy). My companions order you to wait for them.' "
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 540:
Narrated Abu Musa:
We came upon the Prophet after he had conquered Khaibar. He then gave
us a share (from the booty), but apart from us he did not give to anybody
else who did not attend the Conquest.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 541:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
When we conquered Khaibar, we gained neither gold nor silver as booty,
but we gained cows, camels, goods and gardens. Then we departed with
Allah's Apostle to the valley of Al-Qira, and at that time Allah's Apostle had a
slave called Mid'am who had been presented to him by one of Banu AdDibbab. While the slave was dismounting the saddle of Allah's Apostle an
arrow the thrower of which was unknown, came and hit him. The people
said, "Congratulations to him for the martyrdom." Allah's Apostle said, "No,
by Him in Whose Hand my soul is, the sheet (of cloth) which he had taken
(illegally) on the day of Khaibar from the booty before the distribution of
the booty, has become a flame of Fire burning him." On hearing that, a man
brought one or two leather straps of shoes to the Prophet and said, "These
are things I took (illegally)." On that Allah's Apostle said, "This is a strap, or
these are two straps of Fire."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 542:
Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:
By Him in Whose Hand my soul is, were I not afraid that the other Muslims
might be left in poverty, I would divide (the land of) whatever village I may
conquer (among the fighters), as the Prophet divided the land of Khaibar.
But I prefer to leave it as a (source of) a common treasury for them to
distribute it revenue amongst themselves.
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 543:
Narrated 'Umar:
But for the other Muslims (i.e. coming generations) I would divide (the land
of) whatever villages the Muslims might conquer (among the fighters), as
the Prophet divided (the land of) Khaibar.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 544:
Narrated 'Anbasa bin Said:
Abu Huraira came to the Prophet and asked him (for a share from the
Khaibar booty). On that, one of the sons of Said bin Al-'As said to him, "O
Allah's Apostle! Do not give him." Abu Huraira then said (to the Prophet )
"This is the murderer of Ibn Qauqal." Sa'id's son said, "How strange! A
guinea pig coming from Qadum Ad-Dan!"
Narrated Abu Huraira: Allah's Apostle sent Aban from Medina to Najd as the
commander of a Sariya. Aban and his companions came to the Prophet at
Khaibar after the Prophet had conquered it, and the reins of their horses
were made of the fire of date palm trees. I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Do not
give them a share of the booty." on, that, Aban said (to me), "Strange! You
suggest such a thing though you are what you are, O guinea pig coming
down from the top of Ad-Dal (a lotus tree)! "On that the Prophet said, "O
Aban, sit down ! " and did not give them any share.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 545:
Narrated Said:
Aban bin Said came to the Prophet and greeted him. Abu Huraira said, "O
Allah's Apostle! This (Aban) is the murderer of the Ibn Qauqal." (On hearing
that), Aban said to Abu Huraira, "How strange your saying is! You, a guinea
pig, descending from Qadum Dan, blaming me for (killing) a person whom
Allah favored (with martyrdom) with my hand, and whom He forbade to
degrade me with his hand.'
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 546:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Fatima the daughter of the Prophet sent someone to Abu Bakr (when he
was a caliph), asking for her inheritance of what Allah's Apostle had left of
the property bestowed on him by Allah from the Fai (i.e. booty gained
without fighting) in Medina, and Fadak, and what remained of the Khumus
of the Khaibar booty. On that, Abu Bakr said, "Allah's Apostle said, "Our
property is not inherited. Whatever we leave, is Sadaqa, but the family of
(the Prophet) Muhammad can eat of this property.' By Allah, I will not make
any change in the state of the Sadaqa of Allah's Apostle and will leave it as it
was during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle, and will dispose of it as Allah's
Apostle used to do." So Abu Bakr refused to give anything of that to Fatima.
So she became angry with Abu Bakr and kept away from him, and did not
task to him till she died. She remained alive for six months after the death of
the Prophet. When she died, her husband 'Ali, buried her at night without
informing Abu Bakr and he said the funeral prayer by himself. When Fatima
was alive, the people used to respect 'Ali much, but after her death, 'Ali
noticed a change in the people's attitude towards him. So Ali sought
reconciliation with Abu Bakr and gave him an oath of allegiance. 'Ali had not
given the oath of allegiance during those months (i.e. the period between
the Prophet's death and Fatima's death). 'Ali sent someone to Abu Bakr
saying, "Come to us, but let nobody come with you," as he disliked that
'Umar should come, 'Umar said (to Abu Bakr), "No, by Allah, you shall not
enter upon them alone " Abu Bakr said, "What do you think they will do to
me? By Allah, I will go to them' So Abu Bakr entered upon them, and then
'Ali uttered Tashah-hud and said (to Abu Bakr), "We know well your
superiority and what Allah has given you, and we are not jealous of the good
what Allah has bestowed upon you, but you did not consult us in the
question of the rule and we thought that we have got a right in it because of
our near relationship to Allah's Apostle ."
Thereupon Abu Bakr's eyes flowed with tears. And when Abu Bakr spoke, he
said, "By Him in Whose Hand my soul is to keep good relations with the
relatives of Allah's Apostle is dearer to me than to keep good relations with
my own relatives. But as for the trouble which arose between me and you
about his property, I will do my best to spend it according to what is good,
and will not leave any rule or regulation which I saw Allah's Apostle
following, in disposing of it, but I will follow." On that 'Ali said to Abu Bakr,
"I promise to give you the oath of allegiance in this after noon." So when
Abu Bakr had offered the Zuhr prayer, he ascended the pulpit and uttered
the Tashah-hud and then mentioned the story of 'Ali and his failure to give
the oath of allegiance, and excused him, accepting what excuses he had
offered; Then 'Ali (got up) and praying (to Allah) for forgiveness, he uttered
Tashah-hud, praised Abu Bakr's right, and said, that he had not done what
he had done because of jealousy of Abu Bakr or as a protest of that Allah
had favored him with. 'Ali added, "But we used to consider that we too had
some right in this affair (of rulership) and that he (i.e. Abu Bakr) did not
consult us in this matter, and therefore caused us to feel sorry." On that all
the Muslims became happy and said, "You have done the right thing." The
Muslims then became friendly with 'Ali as he returned to what the people
had done (i.e. giving the oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 547:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When Khaibar was conquered, we said, "Now we will eat our fill of dates!"

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 548:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
We did not eat our fill except after we had conquered Khaibar.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 549:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri and Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle appointed a man as the ruler of Khaibar who later brought
some Janib (i.e. dates of good quality) to the Prophet. On that, Allah's
Apostle said (to him). "Are all the dates of Khaibar like this?" He said, "No,
by Allah, O Allah's Apostle! But we take one Sa of these (dates of good
quality) for two or three Sa's of other dates (of inferior quality)." On that,
Allah's Apostle said, "Do not do so, but first sell the inferior quality dates for
money and then with that money, buy Janib." Abu Said and Abu Huraira
said, "The Prophet made the brother of Bani Adi from the Ansar as the ruler
of Khaibar.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 550:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet gave (the land of) Khaibar to the Jews (of Khaibar) on
condition that they would work on it and cultivate it and they would have
half of its yield.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 551:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
When Khaibar was conquered, a (cooked) sheep containing poison, was
given as a present to Allah's Apostle

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 552:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
Allah's Apostle appointed Usama bin Zaid as the commander of some
people. Those people criticized his leadership. The Prophet said, "If you
speak ill of his leadership, you have already spoken ill of his father's
leadership before. By Allah, he deserved to be a Commander, and he was
one of the most beloved persons to me and now this (i.e. Usama) is one of
the most beloved persons to me after him.
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 553:
Narrated Al-Bara:
When the Prophet went out for the 'Umra in the month of Dhal-Qa'da, the
people of Mecca did not allow him to enter Mecca till he agreed to conclude
a peace treaty with them by virtue of which he would stay in Mecca for
three days only (in the following year). When the agreement was being
written, the Muslims wrote: "This is the peace treaty, which Muhammad,
Apostle of Allah has concluded."
The infidels said (to the Prophet), "We do not agree with you on this, for if
we knew that you are Apostle of Allah we would not have prevented you for
anything (i.e. entering Mecca, etc.), but you are Muhammad, the son of
'Abdullah." Then he said to 'Ali, "Erase (the name of) 'Apostle of Allah'." 'Ali
said, "No, by Allah, I will never erase you (i.e. your name)." Then Allah's
Apostle took the writing sheet...and he did not know a better writing..and
he wrote or got it the following written! "This is the peace treaty which
Muhammad, the son of 'Abdullah, has concluded: "Muhammad should not
bring arms into Mecca except sheathed swords, and should not take with
him any person of the people of Mecca even if such a person wanted to
follow him, and if any of his companions wants to stay in Mecca, he should
not forbid him."
(In the next year) when the Prophet entered Mecca and the allowed period
of stay elapsed, the infidels came to Ali and said "Tell your companion
(Muhammad) to go out, as the allowed period of his stay has finished." So
the Prophet departed (from Mecca) and the daughter of Hamza followed
him shouting "O Uncle, O Uncle!" Ali took her by the hand and said to
Fatima, "Take the daughter of your uncle." So she made her ride (on her
horse). (When they reached Medina) 'Ali, Zaid and Ja'far quarreled about
her. 'Ali said, "I took her for she is the daughter of my uncle." Ja'far said,
"She is the daughter of my uncle and her aunt is my wife." Zaid said, "She is
the daughter of my brother." On that, the Prophet gave her to her aunt and
said, "The aunt is of the same status as the mother." He then said to 'Ali,
"You are from me, and I am from you," and said to Ja'far, "You resemble me
in appearance and character," and said to Zaid, "You are our brother and our
freed slave." 'Ali said to the Prophet 'Won't you marry the daughter of
Hamza?" The Prophet said, "She is the daughter of my foster brother."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 554:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle set out with the intention of performing 'Umra, but the
infidels of Quraish intervened between him and the Ka'ba, so the Prophet
slaughtered his Hadi (i.e. sacrificing animals and shaved his head at AlHudaibiya and concluded a peace treaty with them (i.e. the infidels) on
condition that he would perform the 'Umra the next year and that he would
not carry arms against them except swords, and would not stay (in Mecca)
more than what they would allow. So the Prophet performed the 'Umra in
the following year and according to the peace treaty, he entered Mecca, and
when he had stayed there for three days, the infidels ordered him to leave,
and he left.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 555:
Narrated Mujahid:
'Urwa and I entered the Mosque and found 'Abdullah bin 'Umar sitting
beside the dwelling place of 'Aisha. 'Urwa asked (Ibn 'Umar), "How many
'Umras did the Prophet perform?" Ibn 'Umar replied, "Four, one of which
was in Rajab." Then we heard 'Aisha brushing her teeth whereupon 'Urwa
said, "O mother of the believers! Don't you hear what Abu 'Abdur-Rahman is
saying? He is saying that the Prophet performed four 'Umra, one of which
was in Rajab." 'Aisha said, "The Prophet did not perform any 'Umra but he
(i.e. Ibn 'Umar) witnessed it. And he (the Prophet ) never did any 'Umra in
(the month of) Rajab."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 556:
Narrated Ibn Abi Aufa:
When Allah's Apostle performed the 'Umra (which he performed in the year
following the treaty of Al-Hudaibiya) we were screening Allah's Apostle
from the infidels and their boys lest they should harm him.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 557:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
When Allah's Apostle and his companions arrived (at Mecca), the pagans
said, "There have come to you a group of people who have been weakened
by the fever of Yathrib (i.e. Medina)." So the Prophet ordered his
companions to do Ramal (i.e. fast walking) in the first three rounds of Tawaf
around the Ka'ba and to walk in between the two corners (i.e. the black
stone and the Yemenite corner). The only cause which prevented the
Prophet from ordering them to do Ramal in all the rounds of Tawaf, was
that he pitied them.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 558:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet hastened in going around the Ka'ba and between the Safa and
Marwa in order to show the pagans his strength. Ibn 'Abbas added, "When
the Prophet arrived (at Mecca) in the year of peace (following that of AlHudaibiya treaty with the pagans of Mecca), he (ordered his companions) to
do Ramal in order to show their strength to the pagans and the pagans were
watching (the Muslims) from (the hill of) Quaiqan.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 559:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet married Maimuna while he was in the state of lhram but he
consummated that marriage after finishing that state. Maimuna died at
Saraf (i.e. a place near Mecca). Ibn 'Abbas added, The Prophet married
Maimuna during the 'Umrat-al-Qada' (i.e. the 'Umra performed in lieu of the
'Umra which the Prophet could not perform because the pagans, prevented
him to perform that 'Umra)

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 560:
Narrated Nafi:
Ibn 'Umar informed me that on the day (of Mu'tah) he stood beside Ja'far
who was dead (i.e. killed in the battle), and he counted fifty wounds in his
body, caused by stabs or strokes, and none of those wounds was in his back.
'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle appointed Zaid bin Haritha as the
commander of the army during the Ghazwa of Mu'tah and said, "If Zaid is
martyred, Ja'far should take over his position, and if Ja'far is martyred,
'Abdullah bin Rawaha should take over his position.' " 'Abdulla-h bin 'Umar
further said, "I was present amongst them in that battle and we searched
for Ja'far bin Abi Talib and found his body amongst the bodies of the
martyred ones, and found over ninety wounds over his body, caused by
stabs or shots (of arrows).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 561:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet had informed the people of the martyrdom of Zaid, Ja'far and
Ibn Rawaha before the news of their death reached. The Prophet said, "Zaid
took the flag (as the commander of the army) and was martyred, then Ja'far
took it and was martyred, and then Ibn Rawaha took it and was martyred."
At that time the Prophet's eyes were shedding tears. He added, "Then the
flag was taken by a Sword amongst the Swords of Allah (i.e. Khalid) and
Allah made them (i.e. the Muslims) victorious."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 562:
Narrated 'Amra:
I heard 'Aisha saying, "When the news of the martyrdom of Ibn Haritha,
Ja'far bin Abi Talib and 'Abdullah bin Rawaka reached, Allah's Apostle sat
with sorrow explicit on his face." 'Aisha added, "I was then peeping through
a chink in the door. A man came to him and said, "O Allah's Apostle! The
women of Ja'far are crying.' Thereupon the Prophet told him to forbid them
to do so. So the man went away and returned saying, "I forbade them but
they did not listen to me." The Prophet ordered him again to go (and forbid
them). He went again and came saying, 'By Allah, they overpowered me (i.e.
did not listen to me)." 'Aisha said that Allah's Apostle said (to him), "Go and
throw dust into their mouths." Aisha added, "I said, May Allah put your nose
in the dust! By Allah, neither have you done what you have been ordered,
nor have you relieved Allah's Apostle from trouble."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 563:
Narrated 'Amir:
Whenever Ibn 'Umar greeted the son of Ja'far, he used to say (to him),
"Assalam 'Alaika (i.e. peace be on you) O the son of two-winged person."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 564:
Narrated Khalid bin Al-Walid:
On the day (of the battle of) Mu'tah, nine swords were broken in my hand,
and nothing was left in my hand except a Yemenite sword of mine.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 565:
Narrated Khalid bin Al-Walid:
On the day of Mu'tah, nine swords were broken in my hand and only a
Yemenite sword of mine remained in my hand.
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 566:
Narrated An-Nu'man bin Bashir:
Abdullah bin Rawaha fell down unconscious and his sister 'Amra started
crying and was saying loudly, "O Jabala! Oh so-and-so! Oh so-and-so! and
went on calling him by his (good ) qualities one by one). When he came to
his senses, he said (to his sister), "When-ever you said something, I was
asked, 'Are you really so (i.e. as she says)?"

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 567:
Narrated Ash Shabi:
An Nu'man bin Bashir said, "Abdullah bin Rawaha fell down unconscious.."
(and mentioned the above Hadith adding, "Thereupon, when he died she
(i.e. his sister) did not weep over him."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 568:
Narrated Usama bin Zaid:
Allah's Apostle sent us towards Al-Huruqa, and in the morning we attacked
them and defeated them. I and an Ansari man followed a man from among
them and when we took him over, he said, "La ilaha illal-Lah." On hearing
that, the Ansari man stopped, but I killed him by stabbing him with my
spear. When we returned, the Prophet came to know about that and he
said, "O Usama! Did you kill him after he had said "La ilaha ilal-Lah?" I said,
"But he said so only to save himself." The Prophet kept on repeating that so
often that I wished I had not embraced Islam before that day.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 569:
Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa:
I fought in seven Ghazwat (i.e. battles) along with the Prophet and fought in
nine battles, fought by armies dispatched by the Prophet. Once Abu Bakr
was our commander and at another time, Usama was our commander.
Narrated Salama in another narration: I fought seven Ghazwat (i.e. battles)
along with the Prophet and also fought in nine battles, fought by armies
sent by the Prophet . Once Abu Bakr was our commander and another time,
Usama was (our commander).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 570:
Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa:
I fought in nine Ghazwa-t along with the Prophet, I also fought along with
Ibn Haritha when the Prophet made him our commander.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 571:
Narrated Yazid bin Abi Ubaid:
Salama bin Al-Akwa' said, "I fought in seven Ghazwat along with the
Prophet." He then mentioned Khaibar, Al-Hudaibiya, the day (i.e. battle) of
Hunain and the day of Al-Qurad. I forgot the names of the other Ghazwat.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 572:
Narrated 'Ali:
Allah's Apostle sent me, Az-Zubair and Al-Miqdad saying, "Proceed till you
reach Rawdat Khakh where there is a lady carrying a letter, and take that
(letter) from her." So we proceeded on our way with our horses galloping
till we reached the Rawda, and there we found the lady and said to her,
"Take out the letter." She said, "I have no letter." We said, "Take out the
letter, or else we will take off your clothes." So she took it out of her braid,
and we brought the letter to Allah's Apostle . The letter was addressed from
Hatib, bin Abi Balta'a to some pagans of Mecca, telling them about what
Allah's Apostle intended to do. Allah's Apostle said, "O Hatib! What is this?"
Hatib replied, "O Allah's Apostle! Do not make a hasty decision about me. I
was a person not belonging to Quraish but I was an ally to them from
outside and had no blood relation with them, and all the Emigrants who
were with you, have got their kinsmen (in Mecca) who can protect their
families and properties. So I liked to do them a favor so that they might
protect my relatives as I have no blood relation with them. I did not do this
to renegade from my religion (i.e. Islam) nor did I do it to choose
Heathenism after Islam." Allah's Apostle said to his companions." As regards
him, he (i.e. Hatib) has told you the truth." 'Umar said, "O Allah's Apostle!
Allow me to chop off the head of this hypocrite!" The Prophet said, "He (i.e.
Hatib) has witnessed the Badr battle (i.e. fought in it) and what could tell
you, perhaps Allah looked at those who witnessed Badr and said, "O the
people of Badr (i.e. Badr Muslim warriors), do what you like, for I have
forgiven you. "Then Allah revealed the Sura:-"O you who believe! Take not my enemies And your enemies as friends
offering them (Your) love even though they have disbelieved in that Truth
(i.e. Allah, Prophet Muhammad and this Quran) which has come to you
....(to the end of Verse)....(And whosoever of you (Muslims) does that, then
indeed he has gone (far) astray (away) from the Straight Path." (60.1

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 573:
Narrated Ubaidullah bin Abdullah bin 'Utba:
Ibn Abbas said, Allah's Apostle fought the Ghazwa (i.e. battles of Al-Fath
during Ramadan."
Narrated Az-Zuhri: Ibn Al-Musaiyab (also) said the same. Ibn Abbas added,
"The Prophet fasted and when he reached Al-Kadid, a place where there is
water between Kudaid and 'Usfan, he broke his fast and did not fast
afterwards till the whole month had passed away.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 574:
Narrated Ibn Abbas :
The Prophet left Medina (for Mecca) in the company of ten-thousand
(Muslim warriors) in (the month of) Ramadan, and that was eight and a half
years after his migration to Medina. He and the Muslims who were with him,
proceeded on their way to Mecca. He was fasting and they were fasting, but
when they reached a place called Al-Kadid which was a place of water
between 'Usfan and Kudaid, he broke his fast and so did they. (Az-Zuhri said,
"One should take the last action of Allah's Apostle and leave his early action
(while taking a verdict.")

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 575:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Allah's Apostle set out towards Hunain in the month of Ramadan and some
of the people were fasting while some others were not fasting, and when
the Prophet mounted his she-camel, he asked for a tumbler of milk or water
and put it on the palm of his hand or on his she-camel and then the people
looked at him; and those who were not fasting told those who were fasting,
to break their fast (i.e. as the Prophet had done so). Ibn Abbas added, "The
Prophet went (to Hunain) in the year of the Conquest (of Mecca)."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 576:
Narrated Tawus:
Ibn Abbas said, "Allah's Apostle travelled in the month of Ramadan and he
fasted till he reached (a place called) 'Usfan, then he asked for a tumbler of
water and drank it by the daytime so that the people might see him. He
broke his fast till he reached Mecca." Ibn Abbas used to say, "Allah's Apostle
fasted and sometimes did not fast while traveling, so one may fast or may
not (on journeys)"

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 577:
Narrated Hisham's father:
When Allah's Apostle set out (towards Mecca) during the year of the
Conquest (of Mecca) and this news reached (the infidels of Quraish), Abu
Sufyan, Hakim bin Hizam and Budail bin Warqa came out to gather
information about Allah's Apostle , They proceeded on their way till they
reached a place called Marr-az-Zahran (which is near Mecca). Behold! There
they saw many fires as if they were the fires of Arafat. Abu Sufyan said,
"What is this? It looked like the fires of Arafat." Budail bin Warqa' said,
"Banu 'Amr are less in number than that." Some of the guards of Allah's
Apostle saw them and took them over, caught them and brought them to
Allah's Apostle. Abu Sufyan embraced Islam.
When the Prophet proceeded, he said to Al-Abbas, "Keep Abu Sufyan
standing at the top of the mountain so that he would look at the Muslims.
So Al-'Abbas kept him standing (at that place) and the tribes with the
Prophet started passing in front of Abu Sufyan in military batches. A batch
passed and Abu Sufyan said, "O 'Abbas Who are these?" 'Abbas said, "They
are (Banu) Ghifar." Abu Sufyan said, I have got nothing to do with Ghifar."
Then (a batch of the tribe of) Juhaina passed by and he said similarly as
above. Then (a batch of the tribe of) Sad bin Huzaim passed by and he said
similarly as above. then (Banu) Sulaim passed by and he said similarly as
above. Then came a batch, the like of which Abu Sufyan had not seen. He
said, "Who are these?" Abbas said, "They are the Ansar headed by Sad bin
Ubada, the one holding the flag." Sad bin Ubada said, "O Abu Sufyan! Today
is the day of a great battle and today (what is prohibited in) the Ka'ba will be
permissible." Abu Sufyan said., "O 'Abbas! How excellent the day of
destruction is! "Then came another batch (of warriors) which was the
smallest of all the batches, and in it there was Allah's Apostle and his
companions and the flag of the Prophet was carried by Az-Zubair bin Al
Awwam. When Allah's Apostle passed by Abu Sufyan, the latter said, (to the
Prophet), "Do you know what Sad bin 'Ubada said?" The Prophet said,
"What did he say?" Abu Sufyan said, "He said so-and-so." The Prophet said,
"Sad told a lie, but today Allah will give superiority to the Ka'ba and today
the Ka'ba will be covered with a (cloth) covering." Allah's Apostle ordered
that his flag be fixed at Al-Hajun.
Narrated 'Urwa: Nafi bin Jubair bin Mut'im said, "I heard Al-Abbas saying to
Az-Zubair bin Al-'Awwam, 'O Abu 'Abdullah ! Did Allah's Apostle order you to
fix the flag here?' " Allah's Apostle ordered Khalid bin Al-Walid to enter
Mecca from its upper part from Ka'da while the Prophet himself entered
from Kuda. Two men from the cavalry of Khalid bin Al-Wahd named Hubaish
bin Al-Ash'ar and Kurz bin Jabir Al-Fihri were martyred on that day.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 578:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mughaffal:
I saw Allah's Apostle on the day of the Conquest of Mecca over his shecamel, reciting Surat-al-Fath in a vibrant quivering tone. (The sub-narrator,
Mu'awiya added, "Were I not afraid that the people may gather around me,
I would recite in vibrant quivering tone as he (i.e. 'Abdullah bin Mughaffal)
did, imitating Allah's Apostle.")

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 579:
Narrated 'Amr bin 'Uthman:
Usama bin Zaid said during the Conquest (of Mecca), "O Allah's Apostle!
Where will we encamp tomorrow?" The Prophet said, "But has 'Aqil left for
us any house to lodge in?" He then added, "No believer will inherit an
infidel's property, and no infidel will inherit the property of a believer." AzZuhri was asked, "Who inherited Abu Talib?" Az-Zuhri replied, "Ail and Talib
inherited him."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 580:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If Allah makes us victorious, our encamping place will
be Al-Khaif, the place where the infidels took an oath to be loyal to
Heathenism (by boycotting Banu Hashim, the Prophet's folk)."
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 581:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
When Allah's Apostle intended to carry on the Ghazwa of Hunain, he said,
"Tomorrow, if Allah wished, our encamping) plaice will be Khaif Bani Kinana
where (the infidels) took an oath to be loyal to Heathenism."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 582:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
On the day of the Conquest, the Prophet entered Mecca, wearing a helmet
on his head. When he took it off, a man came and said, "Ibn Khatal is clinging
to the curtain of the Ka'ba." The Prophet said, "Kill him." (Malik a subnarrator said, "On that day the Prophet was not in a state of Ihram as it
appeared to us, and Allah knows better.")

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 583:
Narrated Abdullah:
When the Prophet entered Mecca on the day of the Conquest, there were
360 idols around the Ka'ba. The Prophet started striking them with a stick
he had in his hand and was saying, "Truth has come and Falsehood will
neither start nor will it reappear.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 584:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
When Allah's Apostle arrived in Mecca, he refused to enter the Ka'ba while
there were idols in it. So he ordered that they be taken out. The pictures of
the (Prophets) Abraham and Ishmael, holding arrows of divination in their
hands, were carried out. The Prophet said, "May Allah ruin them (i.e. th
infidels) for they knew very well that they (i.e. Abraham and Ishmael) never
drew lots by these (divination arrows). Then the Prophet entered the Ka'ba
and said. "Allahu Akbar" in all its directions and came out and not offer any
prayer therein.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 585:
Narrated 'Aisha:
During the year of the Conquest (of Mecca), the Prophet entered Mecca
through Kada which was at the upper part of Mecca.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 586:
Narrated Hisham's father:
During the year of the Conquest (of Mecca), the Prophet entered Mecca
through its upper part through Kada.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 587:
Narrated Ibn Laila:
None informed us that he saw the Prophet offering the Duha (i.e. forenoon)
prayer, except Um Ham who mentioned that the Prophet took a bath in her
house on the day of the Conquest (of Mecca) and then offered an eight
Rakat prayer. She added, "I never saw the Prophet offering a lighter prayer
than that prayer, but he was performing perfect bowing and prostrations."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 588:
Narrated Ibn Abbas :
'Umar used to admit me (into his house) along with the old men who had
fought in the Badr battle. Some of them said (to 'Umar), "Why do you allow
this young man to enter with us, while we have sons of his own age? " 'Umar
said, "You know what person he is." One day 'Umar called them and called
me along with them, I had thought he called me on that day to show them
something about me (i.e. my knowledge). 'Umar asked them, "What do you
say about (the Sura): "When comes the help of Allah and the Conquest (of
Mecca) And you see mankind entering the Religion of Allah (i.e. Islam) in
crowds. 'So celebrate the Praises Of your Lord and ask for His forgiveness,
Truly, He is the One Who accepts repentance and forgives." (110.1-3)
Some of them replied, "We are ordered to praise Allah and repent to Him if
we are helped and granted victory." Some said, "We do not know." Others
kept quiet. 'Umar then said to me, "Do you say similarly?" I said, "No." 'Umar
said "What do you say then?" I said, "This Verse indicates the approaching of
the death of Allah's Apostle of which Allah informed him. When comes the
help of Allah and the Conquest, i.e. the Conquest of Mecca, that will be the
sign of your Prophet's) approaching death, so testify the uniqueness of your
Lord (i.e. Allah) and praise Him and repent to Him as He is ready to forgive."
On that, 'Umar said, "I do not know about it anything other than what you
know."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 589:
Narrated Abu Shuraih:
Al-Adawi that he said to 'Amr bin Said while the latter was sending troops in
batches to Mecca, "O chief! Allow me to tell you a statement which Allah's
Apostle said on the second day of the Conquest of Mecca. My two ears
heard it and my heart remembered it and my two eyes saw him when he
said it. He (i.e. the Prophet) praised Allah and then said, 'Mecca has been
made a sanctuary by Allah and not by the people, so it is not lawful for a
person, who believes in Allah and the Last Day to shed blood in it, or to cut
its trees and if someone asks the permission to fight in Mecca because
Allah's Apostle was allowed to fight in it, say to him; Allah permitted His
Apostle and did not allow you, and even he (i.e. the Apostle) was allowed
for a short period of the day, and today its (Mecca's sanctity has become the
same as it was before (of old) so those who are present should inform those
who are absent (this Hadith)." Then Abu Shuraih, was asked, "What did 'Amr
say to you? Abu Shuraih said, "He said, "I knew that better than you, O Abu
Shuraih! The Haram (i.e. Mecca) does not give refuge to a sinner or a fleeing
murderer or a person running away after causing destruction."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 590:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
That he heard Allah's Apostle saying in the year of the Conquest (of Mecca)
while he was in Mecca, "Allah and His Apostle have made the selling of wine
(i.e. alcoholic drinks) unlawful."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 591:
Narrated Anas:
We stayed (in Mecca) for ten days along with the Prophet and used to offer
shortened prayers (i.e. journey prayers).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 592:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet stayed in Mecca for 19 days during which he prayed 2 Rakat in
each prayer.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 593:
Narrated 'Ikrima:
Ibn 'Abbas said, "We stayed for 19 days with Prophet on a journey during
which we used to offer shortened prayers." Ibn 'Abbas added, "We offer the
Qasr prayer (i.e. shortened prayer) If we stay up to 19 days as travelers, But
if we stay longer, we offer complete prayers
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 594:
Narrated Az-Zuhri:
While we were in the company of the Ibn Al-Musaiyab, Sunain Abi Jamila
informed us (a Hadith), Abu Jamila said that he lived during the lifetime of
the Prophet and that he had accompanied him ( to Mecca) during the year
of the Conquest (of Mecca).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 595:
Narrated 'Amr bin Salama:
We were at a place which was a thoroughfare for the people, and the
caravans used to pass by us and we would ask them, "What is wrong with
the people? What is wrong with the people? Who is that man?. They would
say, "That man claims that Allah has sent him (as an Apostle), that he has
been divinely inspired, that Allah has revealed to him such-and-such." I used
to memorize that (Divine) Talk, and feel as if it was inculcated in my chest
(i.e. mind) And the 'Arabs (other than Quraish) delayed their conversion to
Islam till the Conquest (of Mecca). They used to say." "Leave him (i.e.
Muhammad) and his people Quraish: if he overpowers them then he is a
true Prophet. So, when Mecca was conquered, then every tribe rushed to
embrace Islam, and my father hurried to embrace Islam before (the other
members of) my tribe. When my father returned (from the Prophet) to his
tribe, he said, "By Allah, I have come to you from the Prophet for sure!" The
Prophet afterwards said to them, 'Offer such-and-such prayer at such-andsuch time, and when the time for the prayer becomes due, then one of you
should pronounce the Adhan (for the prayer), and let the one amongst you
who knows Qur'an most should, lead the prayer." So they looked for such a
person and found none who knew more Qur'an than I because of the
Quranic material which I used to learn from the caravans. They therefore
made me their Imam ((to lead the prayer) and at that time I was a boy of six
or seven years, wearing a Burda (i.e. a black square garment) proved to be
very short for me (and my body became partly naked). A lady from the tribe
said, "Won't you cover the anus of your reciter for us?" So they bought (a
piece of cloth) and made a shirt for me. I had never been so happy with
anything before as I was with that shirt.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 596:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Utba bin Abi Waqqas authorized his brother Sad to take the son of the slavegirl of Zam'a into his custody. 'Utba said (to him). "He is my son." When
Allah's Apostle arrived in Mecca during the Conquest (of Mecca), Sad bin Abi
Waqqas took the son of the slave-girl of Zam'a and took him to the Prophet
'Abd bin Zam'a too came along with him. Sad said. "This is the son of my
brother and the latter has informed me that he is his son." 'Abd bin Zam'a
said, "O Allah's Apostle! This is my brother who is the son of the slave-girl of
Zam'a and was born on his (i.e. Zam'as) bed.' Allah's Apostle looked at the
son of the slave-girl of Zam'a and noticed that he, of all the people had the
greatest resemblance to 'Utba bin Abi Waqqas. Allah's Apostle then said (to
'Abd), " He is yours; he is your brother, O 'Abd bin Zam'a, he was born on
the bed (of your father)." (At the same time) Allah's Apostle said (to his wife
Sauda), "Veil yourself before him (i.e. the son of the slave-girl) O Sauda,"
because of the resemblance he noticed between him and Utba bin Abi
Waqqas. Allah's Apostle added, "The boy is for the bed (i.e. for the owner of
the bed where he was born), and stone is for the adulterer." (Ibn Shihab
said, "Abu Huraira used to say that (i.e. the last statement of the Prophet in
the above Hadith 596, publicly.")

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 597:
Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair:
A lady committed theft during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle in the Ghazwa
of Al-Fath, ((i.e. Conquest of Mecca). Her folk went to Usama bin Zaid to
intercede for her (with the Prophet). When Usama interceded for her with
Allah's Apostle, the color of the face of Allah's Apostle changed and he said,
"Do you intercede with me in a matter involving one of the legal
punishments prescribed by Allah?" Usama said, "O Allah's Apostle! Ask
Allah's Forgiveness for me." So in the afternoon, Allah's Apostle got up and
addressed the people. He praised Allah as He deserved and then said,
"Amma ba'du ! The nations prior to you were destroyed because if a noble
amongst them stole, they used to excuse him, and if a poor person amongst
them stole, they would apply (Allah's) Legal Punishment to him. By Him in
Whose Hand Muhammad's soul is, if Fatima, the daughter of Muhammad
stole, I would cut her hand." Then Allah's Apostle gave his order in the case
of that woman and her hand was cut off. Afterwards her repentance proved
sincere and she got married. 'Aisha said, "That lady used to visit me and I
used to convey her demands to Allah's Apostle

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 598:
Narrated Majashi:
I took my brother to the Prophet after the Conquest (of Mecca) and said, "O
Allah's Apostle! I have come to you with my brother so that you may take a
pledge of allegiance from him for migration." The Prophet said, The people
of migration (i.e. those who migrated to Medina before the Conquest)
enjoyed the privileges of migration (i.e. there is no need for migration
anymore)." I said to the Prophet, "For what will you take his pledge of
allegiance?" The Prophet said, "I will take his pledge of allegiance for Islam,
Belief, and for Jihad (i.e. fighting in Allah's Cause)"

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 599:
Narrated Mujashi bin Masud:
I took Abu Mabad to the Prophet in order that he might give him the pledge
of allegiance for migration. The Prophet said, "Migration has gone to its
people, but I take the pledge from him (i.e. Abu Mabad) for Islam and
Jihad."
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 600:
Narrated Mujahid:
I said to Ibn 'Umar, "I want to migrate to Sham." He said, "There is no
migration, but Jihad (for Allah's Cause). Go and offer yourself for Jihad, and
if you find an opportunity for Jihad (stay there) otherwise, come back." (In
an other narration) Ibn 'Umar said, "There is no migration today or after
Allah's Apostle." (and completed his statement as above.)

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 601:
Narrated Mujahid bin Jabr:
'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to say, "There is no migration after the Conquest
(of Mecca)."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 602:
Narrated 'Ata' bin Abi Rabah:
'Ubaid bin 'Umar and I visited 'Aisha, and he asked her about the migration.
She said, "There is no migration today. A believer used to flee with his
religion to Allah and His Prophet for fear that he might be put to trial as
regards his religion. Today Allah has rendered Islam victorious; therefore a
believing one can worship one's Lord wherever one wishes. But there is
Jihad (for Allah's Cause) and intentions." (See Hadith 42, in the 4th Vol. for
its Explanation)

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 603:
Narrated Mujahid:
Allah's Apostle got up on the day of the Conquest of Mecca and said, "Allah
has made Mecca a sanctuary since the day He created the Heavens and the
Earth, and it will remain a sanctuary by virtue of the sanctity Allah has
bestowed on it till the Day of Resurrection. It (i.e. fighting in it) was not
made lawful to anyone before me!, nor will it be made lawful to anyone
after me, and it was not made lawful for me except for a short period of
time. Its game should not be chased, nor should its trees be cut, nor its
vegetation or grass uprooted, not its Luqata (i.e. Most things) picked up
except by one who makes a public announcement about it." Al-Abbas bin
'Abdul Muttalib said, "Except the Idhkhir, O Allah's Apostle, as it is
indispensable for blacksmiths and houses." On that, the Prophet kept quiet
and then said, "Except the Idhkhir as it is lawful to cut."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 604:
Narrated Ismail:
I saw (a healed scar of) blow over the hand of Ibn Abi Aufa who said, "I
received that blow in the battle of Hunain in the company of the Prophet." I
said, "Did you take part in the battle of Hunain?" He replied, "Yes (and in
other battles) before it."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 605:
Narrated Abu Ishaq:
I heard Al-Bara' narrating when a man came and said to him, "O Abu 'Umara!
Did you flee on the day (of the battle) of Hunain?" Al-Bara' replied, "I testify
that the Prophet did not flee, but the hasty people hurried away and the
people of Hawazin threw arrows at them. At that time, Abu Sufyan bin AlHarith was holding the white mule of the Prophet by the head, and the
Prophet was saying, "I am the Prophet undoubtedly: I am the son of 'AbdulMuttalib."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 606:
Narrated Abu Ishaq:
Al-Bara' was asked while I was listening, "Did you flee (before the enemy)
along with the Prophet on the day of (the battle of) Hunain?" He replied, "As
for the Prophet, he did not (flee). The enemy were good archers and the
Prophet was saying, "I am the Prophet undoubtedly; I am the son of 'Abdul
Muttalib."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 607:
Narrated Abu Ishaq:
That he heard Al-Bara narrating when a man from Qais (tribe) asked him
"Did you flee leaving Allah's Apostle on the day (of the battle) of Hunain?"
Al-Bara' replied, "But Allah's Apostle did not flee. The people of Hawazin
were good archers, and when we attacked them, they fled. But rushing
towards the booty, we were confronted by the arrows (of the enemy). I saw
the Prophet riding his white mule while Abu Sufyan was holding its reins,
and the Prophet was saying "I am the Prophet undoubtedly." (Israil and
Zuhair said, "The Prophet dismounted from his Mule.")

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 608:
Narrated Marwan and Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:
When the delegate of Hawazin came to Allah's Apostle declaring their
conversion to Islam and asked him to return their properties and captives,
Allah's Apostle got up and said to them, "There Is involved in this matter,
the people whom you see with me, and the most beloved talk to me, is the
true one. So choose one of two alternatives: Either the captives or the
properties. I have been waiting for you (i.e. have not distributed the
booty)." Allah's Apostle had delayed the distribution of their booty over ten
nights after his return from Ta'if. So when they came to know that Allah's
Apostle was not going to return to them but one of the two, they said, "We
prefer to have our captives." So Allah's Apostle got up amongst the
Muslims, and praising Allah as He deserved, said, "To proceed! Your brothers
have come to you with repentance and I see (it logical) to return their
captives. So, whoever of you likes to do that as a favor then he can do it.
And whoever of you likes to stick to his share till we give him from the very
first booty which Allah will give us, then he can do so." The people said, "We
do that (i.e. return the captives) willingly as a favor, 'O Allah's Apostle!"
Allah's Apostle said, "We do not know which of you have agreed to it and
which have not; so go back and let your chiefs forward us your decision."
They went back and their chief's spoke to them, and they (i.e. the chiefs)
returned to Allah's Apostle and informed him that all of them had agreed (to
give up their captives) with pleasure, and had given their permission (i.e.
that the captives be returned to their people). (The sub-narrator said, "That
is what has reached me about the captives of Hawazin tribe.")

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 609:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
When we returned from (the battle of) Hunain, 'Umar asked the Prophet
about a vow which he had made during the Pre-lslamic period of Ignorance
that he would perform Itikaf. The Prophet ordered him to fulfill his vow.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 610:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
We set out along with the Prophet during the year of (the battle of) Hunain,
and when we faced the enemy, the Muslims (with the exception of the
Prophet and some of his companions) retreated (before the enemy). I saw
one of the pagans over-powering one of the Muslims, so I struck the pagan
from behind his neck causing his armor to be cut off. The pagan headed
towards me and pressed me so forcibly that I felt as if I was dying. Then
death took him over and he released me. Afterwards I followed 'Umar and
said to him, "What is wrong with the people?" He said, "It is the Order of
Allah." Then the Muslims returned (to the battle after the flight) and (after
overcoming the enemy) the Prophet sat and said, "Whoever had killed an
Infidel and has an evidence to this issue, will have the Salb (i.e. the
belonging of the deceased e.g. clothes, arms, horse, etc)." I (stood up) and
said, "Who will be my witness?" and then sat down. Then the Prophet
repeated his question. Then the Prophet said the same (for the third time). I
got up and said, "Who will be my witness?" and then sat down. The Prophet
asked his former question again. So I got up. The Prophet said, What is the
matter, O Abu Qatada?" So I narrated the whole story; A man said, "Abu
Qatada has spoken the truth, and the Salb of the deceased is with me, so
please compensate Abu Qatada on my behalf." Abu Bakr said, "No! By Allah,
it will never happen that the Prophet will leave a Lion of Allah who fights for
the Sake of Allah and His Apostle and give his spoils to you." The Prophet
said, "Abu Bakr has spoken the truth. Give it (the spoils) back to him (O
man)!" So he gave it to me and I bought a garden in (the land of) Banu
Salama with it (i.e. the spoils) and that was the first property I got after
embracing Islam.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 611:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
When it was the day of (the battle of) Hunain, I saw a Muslim man fighting
with one of the pagans and another pagan was hiding himself behind the
Muslim in order to kill him. So I hurried towards the pagan who was hiding
behind the Muslim to kill him, and he raised his hand to hit me but I hit his
hand and cut it off. That man got hold of me and pressed me so hard that I
was afraid (that I would die), then he knelt down and his grip became loose
and I pushed him and killed him. The Muslims (excepting the Prophet and
some of his companions) started fleeing and I too, fled with them. Suddenly
I met 'Umar bin Al-Khattab amongst the people and I asked him, "What is
wrong with the people?" He said, "It is the order of Allah" Then the people
returned to Allah's Apostle (after defeating the enemy). Allah's Apostle said,
"Whoever produces a proof that he has killed an infidel, will have the spoils
of the killed man." So I got up to look for an evidence to prove that I had
killed an infidel, but I could not find anyone to bear witness for me, so I sat
down. Then it came to my mind (that I should speak of it) and I mentioned
the case to Allah's Apostle. A man from the persons who were sitting with
him (i.e. the Prophet), said, "The arms of the deceased one whom he ( i.e.
Abu Qatada) has mentioned, are with me, so please compensate him for it
(i.e. the spoils)," Abu Bakr said, "No, Allah's Apostle will not give it (i.e. the
spoils) to a weak humble person from Quraish and leave one of Allah's Lions
who fights on behalf of Allah and His Apostle." Allah's Apostle then got up
and gave that (spoils) to me, and I bought with it, a garden which was the
first property I got after embracing Islam.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 612:
Narrated Abu Musa:
When the Prophet had finished from the battle of Hunain, he sent Abu Amir
at the head of an army to Autas He (i.e. Abu Amir) met Duraid bin As Summa
and Duraid was killed and Allah defeated his companions. The Prophet sent
me with Abu 'Amir. Abu Amir was shot at his knee with an arrow which a
man from Jushm had shot and fixed into his knee. I went to him and said, "O
Uncle! Who shot you?" He pointed me out (his killer) saying, "That is my
killer who shot me (with an arrow)." So I headed towards him and overtook
him, and when he saw me, he fled, and I followed him and started saying to
him, "Won't you be ashamed? Won't you stop?" So that person stopped,
and we exchanged two hits with the swords and I killed him. Then I said to
Abu 'Amir. "Allah has killed your killer." He said, "Take out this arrow" So I
removed it, and water oozed out of the wound. He then said, "O son of my
brother! Convey my compliments to the Prophet and request him to ask
Allah's Forgiveness for me." Abu Amir made me his successor in
commanding the people (i.e. troops). He survived for a short while and then
died. (Later) I returned and entered upon the Prophet at his house, and
found him lying in a bed made of stalks of date-palm leaves knitted with
ropes, and on it there was bedding. The strings of the bed had their traces
over his back and sides. Then I told the Prophet about our and Abu Amir's
news and how he had said "Tell him to ask for Allah's Forgiveness for me."
The Prophet asked for water, performed ablution and then raised hands,
saying, "O Allah's Forgive 'Ubaid, Abu Amir." At that time I saw the
whiteness of the Prophet's armpits. The Prophet then said, "O Allah, make
him (i.e. Abu Amir) on the Day of Resurrection, superior to many of Your
human creatures." I said, "Will you ask Allah's Forgiveness for me?" (On
that) the Prophet said, "O Allah, forgive the sins of 'Abdullah bin Qais and
admit him to a nice entrance (i.e. paradise) on the Day of Resurrection." Abu
Burda said, "One of the prayers was for Abu 'Amir and the other was for Abu
Musa (i.e. 'Abdullah bin Qais)."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 613:
Narrated Um Salama:
The Prophet came to me while there was an effeminate man sitting with me,
and I heard him (i.e. the effeminate man) saying to 'Abdullah bin Abi
Umaiya, "O 'Abdullah! See if Allah should make you conquer Ta'if tomorrow,
then take the daughter of Ghailan (in marriage) as (she is so beautiful and
fat that) she shows four folds of flesh when facing you, and eight when she
turns her back." The Prophet then said, "These (effeminate men) should
never enter upon you (O women!)." Ibn Juraij said, "That effeminate man
was called Hit."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 614:
Narrated Hisham:
The above narration and added extra, that at that time, the Prophet, was
besieging Taif.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 615:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Amr:
When Allah's Apostle besieged Taif and could not conquer its people, he
said, "We will return (to Medina) If Allah wills." That distressed the
Companions (of the Prophet and they said, "Shall we go away without
conquering it (i.e. the Fort of Taif)?" Once the Prophet said, "Let us return."
Then the Prophet said (to them), "Fight tomorrow." They fought and (many
of them) got wounded, whereupon the Prophet said, "We will return (to
Medina) tomorrow if Allah wills." That delighted them, whereupon the
Prophet smiled. The sub-narrator, Sufyan said once, "(The Prophet) smiled."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 616:
Narrated Abu Uthman:
I heard from Sad, the first man who has thrown an arrow in Allah's Cause,
and from Abu Bakra who jumped over the wall of the Ta'if Fort along with a
few persons and came to the Prophet. They both said, "We heard the
Prophet saying, " If somebody claims to be the son of somebody other than
his father knowingly, he will be denied Paradise (i.e. he will not enter
Paradise).' "
Narrated Ma'mar from 'Asim from Abu Al'Aliya or Abu Uthman An-Nahdi
who said. "I heard Sad and Abu Bakra narrating from the Prophet." 'Asim
said, "I said (to him), 'Very trustworthy persons have narrated to you.' He
said, 'Yes, one of them was the first to throw an arrow in Allah's Cause and
the other came to the Prophet in a group of thirty-three persons from Ta'if.'

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 617:
Narrated Abu Burda:
Abu Musa said, "I was with the Prophet when he was encamping at AlJarana (a place) between Mecca and Medina and Bilal was with him. A
bedouin came to the Prophet and said, "Won't you fulfill what you have
promised me?" The Prophet said, 'Rejoice (at what I will do for you).' The
bedouin said, "(You have said to me) rejoice too often." Then the Prophet
turned to me (i.e. Abu Musa) and Bilal in an angry mood and said, 'The
bedouin has refused the good tidings, so you both accept them.' Bilal and I
said, 'We accept them.' Then the Prophet asked for a drinking bowl
containing water and washed his hands and face in it, and then took a
mouthful of water and threw it therein saying (to us), "Drink (some of) it
and pour (some) over your faces and chests and be happy at the good
tidings." So they both took the drinking bowl and did as instructed. Um
Salama called from behind a screen, "Keep something (of the water for your
mother." So they left some of it for her.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 618:
Narrated Safwan bin Ya'la bin Umaiya:
Ya'la used to say, "I wish I could see Allah's Apostle at the time when he is
being inspired divinely." Ya'la added "While the Prophet was at Al-Ja'rana,
shaded with a cloth sheet (in the form of a tent) and there were staying with
him, some of his companions under it, suddenly there came to him a
bedouin wearing a cloak and perfumed extravagantly. He said, "O Allah's
Apostle ! What is your opinion regarding a man who assumes the state of
Ihram for 'Umra wearing a cloak after applying perfume to his body?" 'Umar
signalled with his hand to Ya'la to come (near). Ya'la came and put his head
(underneath that cloth sheet) and saw the Prophet red-faced and when that
state (of the Prophet ) was over, he said, "Where is he who as already asked
me about the 'Umra?" The man was looked for and brought to the Prophet
The Prophet said (to him), "As for the perfume you have applied to your
body, wash it off your body) thrice, and take off your cloak, and then do in
your 'Umra the rites you do in your Hajj."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 619:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid bin Asim: When Allah gave to His Apostle the
war booty on the day of Hunain, he distributed that booty amongst those
whose hearts have been (recently) reconciled (to Islam), but did not give
anything to the Ansar. So they

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 620:
Narrated Anas Bin Malik:
hen." Anas added: But they did not remain patient.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 621:
Narrated Anas:
When it was the day of the Conquest (of Mecca) Allah's Apostle distributed
the war booty amongst the people of Quraish which caused the Ansar to
become angry. So the Prophet said, "Won't you be pleased that the people
take the worldly things and you take Allah's Apostle with you? "They said,
"Yes." The Prophet said, "If the people took their way through a valley or
mountain pass, I would take my way through the Ansar's valley or mountain
pass."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 622:
Narrated Anas:
When it was the day of (the battle of) Hunain, the Prophet confronted the
tribe of Hawazin while there were ten-thousand (men) besides the Tulaqa'
(i.e. those who had embraced Islam on the day of the Conquest of Mecca)
with the Prophet. When they (i.e. Muslims) fled, the Prophet said, "O the
group of Ansari" They replied, "Labbaik, O Allah's Apostle and Sadaik! We
are under your command." Then the Prophet got down (from his mule) and
said, "I am Allah's Slave and His Apostle." Then the pagans were defeated.
The Prophet distributed the war booty amongst the Tulaqa and Muhajirin
(i.e. Emigrants) and did not give anything to the Ansar. So the Ansar spoke
(i.e. were dissatisfied) and he called them and made them enter a leather
tent and said, Won't you be pleased that the people take the sheep and
camels, and you take Allah's Apostle along with you?" The Prophet added,
"If the people took their way through a valley and the Ansar took their way
through a mountain pass, then I would choose a mountain pass of the
Ansar"
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 623:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet gathered some people of Ansar and said, "The People of
Quraish are still close to their Pre-lslamic period of ignorance and have
suffered a lot, and I want to help them and attract their hearts (by giving
them the war booty). Won't you be pleased that the people take the worldly
things) and you take Allah's Apostle with you to your homes?" They said,
"Yes, (i.e. we are pleased with this distribution)." The Prophet said, "'If the
people took their way through a valley and the Ansar took their way
through a mountain pass, then I would take the Ansar's valley or the Ansar's
mountain pass."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 624:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
When the Prophet distribute the war booty of Hunain, a man from the Ansar
said, "He (i.e. the Prophet), did not intend to please Allah in this
distribution." So I came to the Prophet and informed him of that
(statement) whereupon the color of his face changed and he said, "May
Allah bestow His Mercy on Moses, for he was troubled with more than this,
but he remained patient."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 625:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
When it was the day of Hunain, Prophet favored some people over some
others (in the distribution of the booty). He gave Al-Aqra' one-hundred
camels and gave Uyaina the same, and also gave other people (of Quraish).
A man said, "Allah's Pleasure was not the aim, in this distribution." I said, "I
will inform the Prophet (about your statement)." The Prophet said, "May
Allah bestow Mercy on Moses, for he was troubled more this but he
remained patient."
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 626:
Narrated Anas Bin Malik:
When it was the day (of the battle) of Hunain, the tributes of Hawazin and
Ghatafan and others, along with their animals and offspring (and wives)
came to fight against the Prophet The Prophet had with him, ten thousand
men and some of the Tulaqa. The companions fled, leaving the Prophet
alone. The Prophet then made two calls which were clearly distinguished
from each other. He turned right and said, "O the group of Ansar!" They
said, "Labbaik, O Allah's Apostle! Rejoice, for we are with you!" Then he
turned left and said, "O the group of Ansar!" They said, "Labbaik! O Allah's
Apostle! Rejoice, for we are with you!" The Prophet at that time, was riding
on a white mule; then he dismounted and said, "I am Allah's Slave and His
Apostle." The infidels then were defeated, and on that day the Prophet
gained a large amount of booty which he distributed amongst the Muhajirin
and the Tulaqa and did not give anything to the Ansar. The Ansar said,
"When there is a difficulty, we are called, but the booty is given to other
than us." The news reached the Prophet and he gathered them in a leather
tent and said, "What is this news reaching me from you, O the group of
Ansar?" They kept silent, He added," O the group of Ansar! Won't you be
happy that the people take the worldly things and you take Allah's Apostle
to your homes reserving him for yourself?" They said, "Yes." Then the
Prophet said, "If the people took their way through a valley, and the Ansar
took their way through a mountain pass, surely, I would take the Ansar's
mountain pass." Hisham said, "O Abu Hamza (i.e. Anas)! Did you witness
that? " He replied, "And how could I be absent from him?"

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 627:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet sent a Sariya towards Najd and I was in it, and our share from
the booty amounted to twelve camels each, and we were given an
additional camel each. So we returned with thirteen camels each.
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 628:
Narrated Salim's father:
The Prophet sent Khalid bin Al-Walid to the tribe of Jadhima and Khalid
invited them to Islam but they could not express themselves by saying,
"Aslamna (i.e. we have embraced Islam)," but they started saying "Saba'na!
Saba'na (i.e. we have come out of one religion to another)." Khalid kept on
killing (some of) them and taking (some of) them as captives and gave every
one of us his Captive. When there came the day then Khalid ordered that
each man (i.e. Muslim soldier) should kill his captive, I said, "By Allah, I will
not kill my captive, and none of my companions will kill his captive." When
we reached the Prophet, we mentioned to him the whole story. On that, the
Prophet raised both his hands and said twice, "O Allah! I am free from what
Khalid has done."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 629:
Narrated 'Ali:
The Prophet sent a Sariya under the command of a man from the Ansar and
ordered the soldiers to obey him. He (i.e. the commander) became angry
and said "Didn't the Prophet order you to obey me!" They replied, "Yes." He
said, "Collect fire-wood for me." So they collected it. He said, "Make a fire."
When they made it, he said, "Enter it (i.e. the fire)." So they intended to do
that and started holding each other and saying, "We run towards (i.e. take
refuge with) the Prophet from the fire." They kept on saying that till the fire
was extinguished and the anger of the commander abated. When that news
reached the Prophet he said, "If they had entered it (i.e. the fire), they
would not have come out of it till the Day of Resurrection. Obedience (to
somebody) is required when he enjoins what is good."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 630:
Narrated Abu Burda:
Allah's Apostle sent Abu Musa and Muadh bin Jabal to Yemen. He sent each
of them to administer a province as Yemen consisted of two provinces. The
Prophet said (to them), "Facilitate things for the people and do not make
things difficult for them (Be kind and lenient (both of you) with the people,
and do not be hard on them) and give the people good tidings and do not
repulse them. So each of them went to carry on his job. So when any one of
them toured his province and happened to come near (the border of the
province of) his companion, he would visit him and greet him. Once Mu'adh
toured that part of his state which was near (the border of the province of)
his companion Abu Musa. Mu'adh came riding his mule till he reached Abu
Musa and saw him sitting, and the people had gathered around him. Behold!
There was a man tied with his hands behind his neck. Mu'adh said to Abu
Musa, "O 'Abdullah bin Qais! What is this?" Abu Musa replied. "This man has
reverted to Heathenism after embracing Islam." Mu'adh said, "I will not
dismount till he is killed." Abu Musa replied, "He has been brought for this
purpose, so come down." Mu'adh said, "I will not dismount till he is killed."
So Abu Musa ordered that he be killed, and he was killed. Then Mu'adh
dismounted and said, "O Abdullah (bin Qais)! How do you recite the Qur'an
?" Abu Musa said, "I recite the Qur'an regularly at intervals and piecemeal.
How do you recite it O Mu'adh?" Mu'adh said, "I sleep in the first part of the
night and then get up after having slept for the time devoted for my sleep
and then recite as much as Allah has written for me. So I seek Allah's Reward
for both my sleep as well as my prayer (at night)."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 631:
Narrated Abi Burda:
That Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari said that the Prophet had sent him to Yemen and
he asked the Prophet about certain (alcoholic) drink which used to be
prepared there The Prophet said, "What are they?" Abu Musa said, "Al-Bit'
and Al-Mizr?" He said, "Al-Bit is an alcoholic drink made from honey; and AlMizr is an alcoholic drink made from barley." The Prophet said, "All
intoxicants are prohibited."
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 632:
Narrated Abu Burda:
That the Prophet sent his (i.e. Abu Burda's) grandfather, Abu Musa and
Mu'adh to Yemen and said to both of them "Facilitate things for the people
(Be kind and lenient) and do not make things difficult (for people), and give
them good tidings, and do not repulse them and both of you should obey
each other." Abu Musa said, "O Allah's Prophet! In our land there is an
alcoholic drink (prepared) from barley called Al-Mizr, and another
(prepared) from honey, called Al-Bit"' The Prophet said, "All intoxicants are
prohibited." Then both of them proceeded and Mu'adh asked Abu Musa,
"How do you recite the Quran?" Abu Musa replied, "I recite it while I am
standing, sitting or riding my riding animals, at intervals and piecemeal."
Muadh said, "But I sleep and then get up. I sleep and hope for Allah's
Reward for my sleep as I seek His Reward for my night prayer." Then he (i.e.
Muadh) pitched a tent and they started visiting each other. Once Muadh
paid a visit to Abu Musa and saw a chained man. Muadh asked, "What is
this?" Abu Musa said, "(He was) a Jew who embraced Islam and has now
turned apostate." Muadh said, "I will surely chop off his neck!"

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 633:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari:
Allah's Apostle sent me (as a governor) to the land of my people, and I came
while Allah's Apostle was encamping at a place called Al-Abtah. The Prophet
said, "Have you made the intention to perform the Hajj, O Abdullah bin
Qais?" I replied, "Yes, O Allah's Apostle!" He said, "What did you say?" I
replied, "I said, 'Labbaik' and expressed the same intention as yours." He
said, "Have you driven the Hadi along with you?" I replied, "No, I did not
drive the Hadi." He said, "So perform the Tawaf of the Ka'ba and then the
Sai, between Safa and Marwa and then finish the state of Ihram." So I did
the same, and one of the women of (the tribe of) Banu-Qais combed my
hair. We continued follow in that tradition till the caliphate of Umar.
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 634:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Allah's Apostle said to Muadh bin Jabal when he sent him to Yemen. "You
will come to the people of Scripture, and when you reach them, invite them
to testify that none has the right to be worshipped except Allah and that
Muhammad is His Apostle. And if they obey you in that, then tell them that
Allah has enjoined on them five prayers to be performed every day and
night. And if they obey you in that, then tell them that Allah has enjoined on
them Sadaqa (i.e. Rakat) to be taken from the rich amongst them and given
to the poor amongst them. And if they obey you in that, then be cautious!
Don't take their best properties (as Zakat) and be afraid of the curse of an
oppressed person as there is no screen between his invocation and Allah.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 635:
Narrated Amr bin Maimuin:
When Mu'adh arrived at Yemen, he led them (i.e. the people of Yemen) in
the Fajr prayer wherein he recited: 'Allah took Abraham as a Khalil.' A man
amongst the people said, "(How) glad the mother of Abraham is!" (In
another narration) 'Amr said, "The Prophet sent Mu'adh to Yemen and he
(led the people) in the Fajr prayer and recited: 'Allah took Abraham as a
Khalil. A man behind him said, "(How) glad the mother of Abraham is!"

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 636:
Narrated Al-Bara:
Allah's Apostle sent us to Yemen along with Khalid bin Al-Walid. Later on he
sent Ali bin Abi Talib in his place. The Prophet said to 'Ali, "Give Khalid's
companions the choice of either staying with you (in Yemen) or returning to
Medina." I was one of those who stayed with him (i.e. Ali) and got several
Awaq (of gold from the war booty.
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 637:
Narrated Buraida:
The Prophet sent 'Ali to Khalid to bring the Khumus (of the booty) and I
hated Ali, and 'Ali had taken a bath (after a sexual act with a slave-girl from
the Khumus). I said to Khalid, "Don't you see this (i.e. Ali)?" When we
reached the Prophet I mentioned that to him. He said, "O Buraida! Do you
hate Ali?" I said, "Yes." He said, "Do you hate him, for he deserves more than
that from the Khumlus."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 638:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
'Ali bin Abi Talib sent a piece of gold not yet taken out of its ore, in a tanned
leather container to Allah's Apostle . Allah's Apostle distributed that
amongst four Persons: 'Uyaina bin Badr, Aqra bin Habis, Zaid Al-Khail and
the fourth was either Alqama or Amir bin At Tufail. On that, one of his
companions said, "We are more deserving of this (gold) than these
(persons)." When that news reached the Prophet , he said, "Don't you trust
me though I am the truth worthy man of the One in the Heavens, and I
receive the news of Heaven (i.e. Divine Inspiration) both in the morning and
in the evening?" There got up a man with sunken eyes, raised cheek bones,
raised forehead, a thick beard, a shaven head and a waist sheet that was
tucked up and he said, "O Allah's Apostle! Be afraid of Allah." The Prophet
said, "Woe to you! Am I not of all the people of the earth the most entitled
to fear Allah?" Then that man went away. Khalid bin Al-Wahd said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Shall I chop his neck off?" The Prophet said, "No, for he may offer
prayers." Khalid said, "Numerous are those who offer prayers and say by
their tongues (i.e. mouths) what is not in their hearts." Allah's Apostle said,
"I have not been ordered (by Allah) to search the hearts of the people or cut
open their bellies." Then the Prophet looked at him (i.e. that man) while the
latter was going away and said, "From the offspring of this (man there will
come out (people) who will recite the Qur'an continuously and elegantly but
it will not exceed their throats. (They will neither understand it nor act upon
it). They would go out of the religion (i.e. Islam) as an arrow goes through a
game's body." I think he also said, "If I should be present at their time I
would kill them as the nations a Thamud were killed."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 639:
Narrated 'Ata:
Jabir said, "The Prophet ordered 'Ali to keep the state of Ihram." Jabir
added, "Ali bin Abi Talib returned (from Yemen) when he was a governor (of
Yemen). The Prophet said to him, 'With what intention have you assumed
the state of Ihram?' 'Ali said, "I have assumed Ihram with an intention as that
of the Prophet." Then the Prophet said (to him), 'Offer a Hadi and keep the
state of Ihram in which you are now.' 'Ali slaughtered a Hadi on his behalf."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 640:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
The Prophet assumed the state of Ihram for Umra and Hajj, and we to
assumed it for Hajj with him. When we arrived at Mecca, the Prophet said,
"Whoever does not possess a Hadi should regard his Ihram for Umra only."
The Prophet had a Hadi with him. 'Ali bin Abi Talib came to us from Yemen
with the intention of performing Hajj. The Prophet said (to him), "With what
intention have you assumed the Ihram, for your wife is with us?" 'Ali said, "I
assumed the lhram with the same intention as that of the Prophet ." The
Prophet said, "Keep on the state of lhram, as we have got the Hadi."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 641:
Narrated Jarir:
In the Pre-lslamic Period of Ignorance there was a house called Dhu-lKhalasa or Al-Ka'ba Al-Yamaniya or Al-Ka'ba Ash-Shamiya. The Prophet said
to me, "Won't you relieve me from Dhu-l-Khalasa?" So I set out with onehundred-and-fifty riders, and we dismantled it and killed whoever was
present there. Then I came to the Prophet and informed him, and he
invoked good upon us and Al-Ahmas (tribe) .

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 642:
Narrated Qais:
Jarir said to me, The Prophet said to me, "Won't you relieve me from Dhu-lKhalasa?" And that was a house (in Yemem belonging to the tribe of)
Khatham called Al-Kaba Al Yamaniya. I proceeded with one-hundred andfifty cavalry from Ahmas (tribe) who were horse riders. I used not to sit firm
on horses, so the Prophet stroke me over my chest till I saw the mark of his
fingers over my chest, and then he said, 'O Allah! Make him (i.e. Jarir) firm
and one who guides others and is guided on the right path." So Jarir
proceeded to it dismantled and burnt it, and then sent a messenger to
Allah's Apostle. The messenger of Jarir said (to the Prophet), "By Him Who
sent you with the Truth, I did not leave that place till it was like a scabby
camel." The Prophet blessed the horses of Ahmas and their men five times.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 643:
Narrated Qais:
Jarir said "Allah's Apostle said to me, "Won't you relieve me from DhulKhalasa?" I replied, "Yes, (I will relieve you)." So I proceeded along with onehundred and fifty cavalry from Ahmas tribe who were skillful in riding
horses. I used not to sit firm over horses, so I informed the Prophet of that,
and he stroke my chest with his hand till I saw the marks of his hand over my
chest and he said, O Allah! Make him firm and one who guides others and is
guided (on the right path).' Since then I have never fallen from a horse.
Dhul-l--Khulasa was a house in Yemen belonging to the tribe of Khatham and
Bajaila, and in it there were idols which were worshipped, and it was called
Al-Ka'ba." Jarir went there, burnt it with fire and dismantled it. When Jarir
reached Yemen, there was a man who used to foretell and give good omens
by casting arrows of divination. Someone said to him. "The messenger of
Allah's Apostle is present here and if he should get hold of you, he would
chop off your neck." One day while he was using them (i.e. arrows of
divination), Jarir stopped there and said to him, "Break them (i.e. the
arrows) and testify that None has the right to be worshipped except Allah,
or else I will chop off your neck." So the man broke those arrows and
testified that none has the right to be worshipped except Allah. Then Jarir
sent a man called Abu Artata from the tribe of Ahmas to the Prophet to
convey the good news (of destroying Dhu-l-Khalasa). So when the
messenger reached the Prophet, he said, "O Allah's Apostle! By Him Who
sent you with the Truth, I did not leave it till it was like a scabby camel."
Then the Prophet blessed the horses of Ahmas and their men five times.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 644:
Narrated Abu Uthman:
Allah's Apostle sent 'Amr bin Al As as the commander of the troops of Dhatus-Salasil. 'Amr bin Al-'As said, "(On my return) I came to the Prophet and
said, 'Which people do you love most?' He replied, 'Aisha.' I said, 'From
amongst the men?' He replied, 'Her father (Abu Bakr)'. I said, 'Whom (do
you love) next?' He replied, "Umar.' Then he counted the names of many
men, and I became silent for fear that he might regard me as the last of
them."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 645:
Narrated Jarir:
While I was at Yemen, I met two men from Yemen called Dhu Kala and Dhu
Amr, and I started telling them about Allah's Apostle. Dhu Amr said to me,
"If what you are saying about your friend (i.e. the Prophet) is true, then he
has died three days ago." Then both of them accompanied me to Medina,
and when we had covered some distance on the way to Medina, we saw
some riders coming from Medina. We asked them and they said, "Allah's
Apostle has died and Abu Bakr has been appointed as the Caliph and the
people are in a good state.' Then they said, "Tell your friend (Abu Bakr) that
we have come (to visit him), and if Allah will, we will come again." So they
both returned to Yemen. When I told Abu Bakr their statement, he said to
me, "I wish you had brought them (to me)." Afterwards I met Dhu Amr, and
he said to me, "O Jarir! You have done a favor to me and I am going to tell
you something, i.e. you, the nation of 'Arabs, will remain prosperous as long
as you choose and appoint another chief whenever a former one is dead.
But if authority is obtained by the power of the sword, then the rulers will
become kings who will get angry, as kings get angry, and will be delighted as
kings get delighted."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 646:
Narrated Wahab bin Kaisan:
Jabir bin Abdullah said, "Allah's Apostle sent troops to the sea coast and
appointed Abu 'Ubaida bin Al-Jarrah as their commander, and they were 300
(men). We set out, and we had covered some distance on the way, when
our journey food ran short. So Abu 'Ubaida ordered that all the food present
with the troops be collected, and it was collected. Our journey food was
dates, and Abu Ubaida kept on giving us our daily ration from it little by little
(piecemeal) till it decreased to such an extent that we did not receive except
a date each." I asked (Jabir), "How could one date benefit you?" He said,
"We came to know its value when even that finished." Jabir added, "Then
we reached the sea (coast) where we found a fish like a small mountain. The
people (i.e. troops) ate of it for 18 nights (i.e. days). Then Abu 'Ubaida
ordered that two of its ribs be fixed on the ground (in the form of an arch)
and that a she-camel be ridden and passed under them. So it passed under
them without touching them."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 647:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle sent us who were three-hundred riders under the command
of Abu Ubaida bin Al-Jarrah in order to watch the caravan of the Quraish
pagans. We stayed at the seashore for half a month and were struck with
such severe hunger that we ate even the Khabt (i.e. the leaves of the Salam,
a thorny desert tree), and because of that, the army was known as Jaish-ulKhabt. Then the sea threw out, an animal (i.e. a fish) called Al-'Anbar and we
ate of that for half a month, and rubbed its fat on our bodies till our bodies
returned to their original state (i.e. became strong and healthy). Abu Ubaida
took one of its ribs, fixed it on the ground; then he went to the tallest man
of his companions (to let him pass under the rib). Once Sufyan said, "He
took a rib from its parts and fixed it, and then took a man and camel and
they passed from underneath it (without touching it). " Jabir added: There
was a man amongst the people who slaughtered three camels and then
slaughtered another three camels and then slaughtered other three camels,
and then Abu 'Ubaida forbade him to do so.
Narrated Abu Salih: Qais bin Sad said to his father. "I was present in the
army and the people were struck with severe hunger." He said, "You should
have slaughtered (camels) (for them)." Qais said, "I did slaughter camels but
they were hungry again. He said, "You should have slaughtered (camels)
again." Qais said, "I did slaughter (camels) again but the people felt hungry
again." He said, "You should have slaughtered (camels) again." Qais said, "I
did slaughter (camels) again, but the people again felt hungry." He said,
"You should have slaughtered (camels) again." Qais said, "But I was
forbidden (by Abu 'Ubaida this time)."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 648:
Narrated Jabir:
We set out in the army of Al-Khabt and Abu Ubaida was the commander of
the troops. We were struck with severe hunger and the sea threw out a
dead fish the like of which we had never seen, and it was called Al-'Anbar.
We ate of it for half a month. Abu Ubaida took (and fixed) one of its bones
and a rider passed underneath it (without touching it). (Jabir added:) Abu
'Ubaida said (to us), "Eat (of that fish)." When we arrived at Medina, we
informed the Prophet about that, and he said, "Eat, for it is food Allah has
brought out for you, and feed us if you have some of it." So some of them
gave him (of that fish) and he ate it.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 649:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
That during the Hajj in which the Prophet had made Abu Bakr As Siddiq as
chief of the, Hajj before the Hajj-ul-Wida,' on the day of Nahr, Abu Bakr sent
him along with a group of persons to announce to the people. "No pagan is
permitted to perform Hajj after this year, and nobody is permitted to
perform the Tawaf of the Ka'ba naked."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 650:
Narrated Al-Bara:
The last Sura which was revealed in full was Baraa (i.e. Sura-at-Tauba), and
the last Sura (i.e. part of a Sura) which was revealed was the last Verses of
Sura-an-Nisa':-- "They ask you for a legal decision. Say: Allah directs (thus)
About those who have No descendants or ascendants As heirs." (4.177)

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 651:
Narrated 'Imran bin Hussein:
A delegation from Banu Tamim came to the Prophet . The Prophet said,
"Accept the good tidings, O Banu Tamim!" They said, "O Allah's Apostle! You
have given us good tidings, so give us (something)." Signs of displeasure
appeared on his face. Then another delegation from Yemen came and he
said (to them), "Accept the good tidings, for Banu Tamim refuses to accept
them." They replied, "We have accepted them, O Allah's Apostle!"
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 652:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I have not ceased to like Banu Tamim ever since I heard of three qualities
attributed to them by Allah's Apostle (He said): They, out of all my followers,
will be the strongest opponent of Ad-Dajjal; 'Aisha had a slave-girl from
them, and the Prophet told her to manumit her as she was from the
descendants of (the Prophet) Ishmael; and, when their Zakat was brought,
the Prophet said, "This is the Zakat of my people."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 653:
Narrated Ibn Abi Mulaika:
'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair said that a group of riders belonging to Banu Tamim
came to the Prophet, Abu Bakr said (to the Prophet ), "Appoint Al-Qa'qa bin
Mabad bin Zurara as (their) ruler." 'Umar said (to the Prophet). "No! But
appoint Al-Aqra bin Habis." Thereupon Abu Bakr said (to 'Umar). "You just
wanted to oppose me." 'Umar replied. "I did not want to oppose you." So
both of them argued so much that their voices became louder, and then the
following Divine Verses were revealed in that connection:-- "O you who
believe ! Do not be forward in the presence of Allah and His Apostle..." (till
the end of Verse)...(49.1)

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 654:
Narrated Abu Jamra:
I said to Ibn 'Abbas, "I have an earthenware pot containing Nabidh (i.e.
water and dates or grapes) for me, and I drink of it while it is sweet. If I drink
much of it and stay with the people for a long time, I get afraid that they
may discover it (for I will appear as if I were drunk). Ibn 'Abbas said, "A
delegation of Abdul Qais came to Allah's Apostle and he said, "Welcome, O
people! Neither will you have disgrace nor will you regret." They said, "O
Allah's Apostle! There are the Mudar pagans between you and us, so we
cannot come to you except in the sacred Months. So please teach us some
orders on acting upon which we will enter Paradise. Besides, we will preach
that to our people who are behind us." The Prophet said, "I order you to do
four things and forbid you from four things (I order you): To believe in
Allah...Do you know what is to believe in Allah? That is to testify that None
has the right to be worshipped except Allah: (I order you also to offer
prayers perfectly to pay Zakat; and to fast the month of Ramadan and to
give the Khumus (i.e. one-fifth of the booty) (for Allah's Sake). I forbid you
from four other things (i.e. the wine that is prepared in) Ad-Dubba, AnNaquir, Az-Hantam and Al-Muzaffat. (See Hadith No. 50 Vol. 1)

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 655:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The delegation of 'Abdul Qais came to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's
Apostle We belong to the tribe of Rabia. The infidels of Mudar tribe
intervened between us and you so that we cannot come to you except in
the Sacred Months, so please order us some things we may act on and invite
those left behind to act on. The Prophet said, "I order you to observe four
things and forbid you from four things: (I order you) to believe in Allah, i.e.
to testify that None has the right to be worshipped except Allah." The
Prophet pointed with finger indicating one and added, "To offer prayers
perfectly: to give Zakat, and to give one-fifth of the booty you win (for
Allah's Sake). I forbid you to use Ad-Dubba', An-Naquir, Al-Hantam and AlMuzaffat, (Utensils used for preparing alcoholic liquors and drinks)

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 656:
Narrated Bukair:
That Kuraib, the freed slave of Ibn Abbas told him that Ibn Abbas, 'AbdurRahman bin Azhar and Al-Miswar bin Makhrama sent him to 'Aisha saying,
"Pay her our greetings and ask her about our offering of the two-Rak'at
after 'Asr Prayer, and tell her that we have been informed that you offer
these two Rakat while we have heard that the Prophet had forbidden their
offering." Ibn 'Abbas said, "I and 'Umar used to beat the people for their
offering them." Kuraib added, "I entered upon her and delivered their
message to her.' She said, 'Ask Um Salama.' So, I informed them (of 'Aisha's
answer) and they sent me to Um Salama for the same purpose as they sent
me to 'Aisha. Um Salama replied, 'I heard the Prophet forbidding the
offering of these two Rakat. Once the Prophet offered the 'Asr prayer, and
then came to me. And at that time some Ansari women from the Tribe of
Banu Haram were with me. Then (the Prophet ) offered those two Rakat,
and I sent my (lady) servant to him, saying, 'Stand beside him and say (to
him): Um Salama says, 'O Allah's Apostle! Didn't I hear you forbidding the
offering of these two Rakat (after the Asr prayer yet I see you offering
them?' And if he beckons to you with his hand, then wait behind.' So the
lady slave did that and the Prophet beckoned her with his hand, and she
stayed behind, and when the Prophet finished his prayer, he said, 'O the
daughter of Abu Umaiya (i.e. Um Salama), You were asking me about these
two Rakat after the 'Asr prayer. In fact, some people from the tribe of
'Abdul Qais came to me to embrace Islam and busied me so much that I did
not offer the two Rakat which were offered after Zuhr compulsory prayer,
and these two Rakat (you have seen me offering) make up for those."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 657:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The first Friday (i.e. Jumua) prayer offered after the Friday Prayer offered at
the Mosque of Allah's Apostle was offered at the mosque of Abdul Qais
situated at Jawathi, that is a village at Al Bahrain .

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 658:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet sent some cavalry towards Najd and they brought a man from
the tribe of Banu Hanifa who was called Thumama bin Uthal. They fastened
him to one of the pillars of the Mosque. The Prophet went to him and said,
"What have you got, O Thumama?" He replied," I have got a good thought,
O Muhammad! If you should kill me, you would kill a person who has already
killed somebody, and if you should set me free, you would do a favor to one
who is grateful, and if you want property, then ask me whatever wealth you
want." He was left till the next day when the Prophet said to him, "What
have you got, Thumama? He said, "What I told you, i.e. if you set me free,
you would do a favor to one who is grateful." The Prophet left him till the
day after, when he said, "What have you got, O Thumama?" He said, "I have
got what I told you. "On that the Prophet said, "Release Thumama." So he
(i.e. Thumama) went to a garden of date-palm trees near to the Mosque,
took a bath and then entered the Mosque and said, "I testify that None has
the right to be worshipped except Allah, and also testify that Muhammad is
His Apostle! By Allah, O Muhammad! There was no face on the surface of the
earth most disliked by me than yours, but now your face has become the
most beloved face to me. By Allah, there was no religion most disliked by me
than yours, but now it is the most beloved religion to me. By Allah, there
was no town most disliked by me than your town, but now it is the most
beloved town to me. Your cavalry arrested me (at the time) when I was
intending to perform the 'Umra. And now what do you think?" The Prophet
gave him good tidings (congratulated him) and ordered him to perform the
'Umra. So when he came to Mecca, someone said to him, "You have
become a Sabian?" Thumama replied, "No! By Allah, I have embraced Islam
with Muhammad, Apostle of Allah. No, by Allah! Not a single grain of wheat
will come to you from Jamaica unless the Prophet gives his permission."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 659:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Musailima Al-Kadhdhab came during the lifetime of the Prophet and started
saying, "If Muhammad gives me the rule after him, I will follow him." And he
came to Medina with a great number of the people of his tribe. Allah's
Apostle went to him in the company of Thabit bin Qais bin Shammas, and at
that time, Allah's Apostle had a stick of a date-palm tree in his hand. When
he (i.e. the Prophet ) stopped near Musailima while the latter was amidst his
companions, he said to him, "If you ask me for this piece (of stick), I will not
give it to you, and Allah's Order you cannot avoid, (but you will be
destroyed), and if you turn your back from this religion, then Allah will
destroy you. And I think you are the same person who was shown to me in
my dream, and this is Thabit bin Qais who will answer your questions on my
behalf." Then the Prophet went away from him. I asked about the
statement of Allah's Apostle : "You seem to be the same person who was
shown to me in my dream," and Abu Huraira informed me that Allah's
Apostle said, "When I was sleeping, I saw (in a dream) two bangles of gold
on my hands and that worried me. And then I was inspired Divinely in the
dream that I should blow on them, so I blew on them and both the bangles
flew away. And I interpreted it that two liars (who would claim to be
prophets) would appear after me. One of them has proved to be Al Ansi and
the other, Musailima."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 660:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "While I was sleeping, I was given the treasures of the
earth and two gold bangles were put in my hands, and I did not like that, but
I received the inspiration that I should blow on them, and I did so, and both
of them vanished. I interpreted it as referring to the two liars between
whom I am present; the ruler of Sana and the Ruler of Yamaha."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 661:
Narrated Abu Raja Al-Utaridi:
We used to worship stones, and when we found a better stone than the first
one, we would throw the first one and take the latter, but if we could not
get a stone then we would collect some earth (i.e. soil) and then bring a
sheep and milk that sheep over it, and perform the Tawaf around it. When
the month of Rajab came, we used (to stop the military actions), calling this
month the iron remover, for we used to remove and throw away the iron
parts of every spear and arrow in the month of Rajab. Abu Raja' added:
When the Prophet sent with (Allah's) Message, I was a boy working as a
shepherd of my family camels. When we heard the news about the
appearance of the Prophet, we ran to the fire, i.e. to Musailima al-Kadhdhab.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 662:
Narrated Ubaidullah bin Abdullah bin Utba:
We were informed that Musailima Al-Kadhdhab had arrived in Medina and
stayed in the house of the daughter of Al-Harith. The daughter of Al-Harith
bin Kuraiz was his wife and she was the mother of 'Abdullah bin 'Amir. There
came to him Allah's Apostle accompanied by Thabit bin Qais bin Shammas
who was called the orator of Allah's Apostle. Allah's Apostle had a stick in
his hand then. The Prophet stopped before Musailima and spoke to him.
Musailima said to him, "If you wish, we would not interfere between you
and the rule, on condition that the rule will be ours after you... The Prophet
said, "If you asked me for this stick, I would not give it to you. I think you are
the same person who was shown to me in a dream. And this is Thabit bin AlQais who will answer you on my behalf." The Prophet then went away. I
asked Ibn Abbas about the dream Allah's Apostle had mentioned. Ibn Abbas
said, "Someone told me that the Prophet said, "When I was sleeping, I saw
in a dream that two gold bangles were put in my hands, and that frightened
me and made me dislike them. Then I was allowed to blow on them, and
when I blew at them, both of them flew. Then I interpreted them as two
liars who would appear.' One of them was Al-'Ansi who was killed by Fairuz
in Yemen and the other was Musailima Al-Kadhdbab."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 663:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
Al-'Aqib and Saiyid, the rulers of Najran, came to Allah's Apostle with the
intention of doing Lian one of them said to the other, "Do not do (this Lian)
for, by Allah, if he is a Prophet and we do this Lian, neither we, nor our
offspring after us will be successful." Then both of them said (to the
Prophet ), "We will give what you should ask but you should send a
trustworthy man with us, and do not send any person with us but an honest
one." The Prophet said, "I will send an honest man who Is really
trustworthy." Then every one of the companions of Allah's Apostle wished
to be that one. Then the Prophet said, "Get up, O Abu 'Ubaida bin Al-Jarrah."
When he got up, Allah's Apostle said, "This is the Trustworthy man of this
(Muslim) nation."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 664:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
The people of Najran came to the Prophet and said, "Send an honest man to
us." The Prophet said, "I will send to you an honest man who is really
trustworthy." Everyone of the (Muslim) people hoped to be that one. The
Prophet then sent Abu Ubaida bin Al-Jarrah.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 665:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "Every nation has an Amin (i.e. the most honest man), and
the Amin of this nation is Abu 'Ubaida bin Al-Jarrah."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 666:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said to me, "If the revenue of Al-Bahrain should come, I will
give you so much and so much," repeating "so much" thrice. But the
revenue of Al-Bahrain did not come till Allah's Apostle had died. When the
revenue came during the rule of Abu Bakr. Abu Bakr ordered an announcer
to announce, "Whoever had any debt or promise due upon the Prophet,
should present himself to me (i.e. Abu Bakr). I came to Abu Bakr and
informed him that the Prophet had said (to me), "If the revenue of AlBahrain should come, I will give you so-much and so much," repeating "so
much" thrice. So Abu Bakr gave me (in another narration Jaibir said,). I met
Abu Bakr after that and asked him (to give me what the Prophet had
promised me) but he did not give me. I again went to him but he did not
give me. I again went to him (for the third time) but he did not give me; On
that I said to him, "I came to you but you did not give me, then I came to you
and you did not give me, and then again I came to you, but you did not give
me; so you should either give me or else you are like a miserly to me, on
that, Abu Bakr said, "Do you say, 'You are like a miserly to me?' There is no
worse disease than miserliness." Abu Bakr said it thrice and added,
"Whenever I refused to give you, I had the intention of giving you." (In
another narration) Jabir bin 'Abdullah said, "I went to Abu Bakr (and he gave
me a handful of money) and told me to count it, I counted and found it fivehundred, and then Abu Bakr said (to me), "Take the same amount twice."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 667:
Narrated Abu Musa:
My brother and I came from Yemen (to Medina) and remained for some
time, thinking that Ibn Masud and his mother belonged to the family of the
Prophet because of their frequent entrance (upon the Prophet) and their
being attached to him.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 668:
Narrated Zahdam:
When Abu Musa arrived (at Kufa as a governor) he honored this family of
Jarm (by paying them a visit). I was sitting near to him, and he was eating
chicken as his lunch, and there was a man sitting amongst the people. Abu
Musa invited the man to the lunch, but the latter said, "I saw chickens
(eating something (dirty) so I consider them unclean." Abu Musa said,
"Come on! I saw the Prophet eating it (i.e. chicken)." The man said "I have
taken an oath that I will not ea (chicken)" Abu Musa said." Come on! I will
tell you about your oath. We, a group of Al-Ash'ariyin people went to the
Prophet and asked him to give us something to ride, but the Prophet
refused. Then we asked him for the second time to give us something to
ride, but the Prophet took an oath that he would not give us anything to
ride. After a while, some camels of booty were brought to the Prophet and
he ordered that five camels be given to us. When we took those camels we
said, "We have made the Prophet forget his oath, and we will not be
successful after that." So I went to the Prophet and said, "O Allah' Apostle !
You took an oath that you would not give us anything to ride, but you have
given us." He said, "Yes, for if I take an oath and later I see a better solution
than that, I act on the later (and gave the expiation of that oaths"

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 669:
Narrated Imran bin Husain:
The people of Banu Tamim came to Allah's Apostle, and he said, "Be glad
(i.e. have good tidings). O Banu Tamim!" They said, "As you have given us
good tidings then give us (some material things)." On that the features of
Allah's Apostle changed (i.e. he took it ill). Then some people from Yemen
came, and the Prophet said (to them) "Accept good tidings as Banu Tamim
have not accepted them." They said, "We accept them, O Allah's Apostle!"

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 670:
Narrated Abu Masud: The Prophet beckoned with his hand towards Yemen
and said, "Belief is there." The harshness and mercilessness are the qualities
of those farmers etc, who are busy with their camels and pay no attention to
the religion (is towards

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 671:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The people of Yemen have come to you and they are
more gentle and soft-hearted. Belief is Yemenite and Wisdom is Yemenite,
while pride and haughtiness are the qualities of the owners of camels (i.e.
bedouins). Calmness and solemnity are the characters of the owners of
sheep."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 672:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Belief is Yemenite while afflictions appear from there
(the east) from where the side of the head of Satan will appear."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 673:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The people of Yemen have come to you, and they are
more soft hearted and gentle hearted people. The capacity for
understanding religion is Yemenite and Wisdom is Yemenite."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 674:
Narrated Alqama:
We were sitting with Ibn Masud when Khabbab came and said, "O Abu
Abdur-Rahman! Can these young fellows recite Qur'an as you do?" Ibn
Mas'ud said, "If you wish I can order one of them to recite (Qur'an) for you
." Khabbab replied, "Yes. "Ibn Mas'ud said, "Recite, O 'Alqama!" On that,
Zaid bin Hudair, the brother of Ziyad bin Hudair said, (to Ibn Mas'ud), "Why
have you ordered 'Alqama to recite though he does not recite better than
we?" Ibn Mas'ud said, "If you like, I would tell you what the Prophet said
about your nation and his (i.e. 'Alqama's) nation." So I recited fifty Verses
from Sura-Maryam. 'Abdullah (bin Mas'ud) said to Khabbab, "What do you
think (about 'Alqama's recitation)?" Khabbab said, "He has recited well."
'Abdullah said, "Whatever I recite, 'Alqama recites." Then 'Abdullah turned
towards Khabbab and saw that he was wearing a gold ring, whereupon he
said, "Hasn't the time for its throwing away come yet?" Khabbab said, "You
will not see me wearing it after today," and he throw it away.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 675:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Tufail bin 'Amr came to the Prophet and said, "The Daus (nation) have
perished as they disobeyed and refused to accept Islam. So invoke Allah
against them." But the Prophet said, "O Allah! Give guidance to the Daus
(tribe) and bring them (to Islam)!"

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 676:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
When I came to the Prophet said on my way, "O what a long tedious
tiresome night; nevertheless, it has rescued me from the place of
Heathenism." A slave of mine ran away on the way. When I reached the
Prophet I gave him the oath of allegiance (for Islam), and while I was sitting
with him, suddenly the slave appeared. The Prophet said to me. "O Abu
Huraira! Here is your slave," I said, "He (i.e. the slave) is (free) for Allah's
Sake," and manumitted him.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 677:
Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim:
We came to 'Umar in a delegation (during his rule). He started calling the
men one by one, calling each by his name. (As he did not call me early) I said
to him. "Don't you know me, O chief of the Believers?" He said, "Yes, you
embraced Islam when they (i.e. your people) disbelieved; you have come (to
the Truth) when they ran away; you fulfilled your promises when they broke
theirs; and you recognized it (i.e. the Truth of Islam) when they denied it."
On that, 'Adi said, "I therefore don't care."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 678:
Narrated 'Aisha:
We went out with Allah's Apostle during Hajjat-ul-Wada' and we assumed
the Ihram for 'Umra. Then Allah's Apostle said to us, "Whoever has got the
Hadi should assume the Ihram for Hajj and 'Umra and should not finish his
Ihram till he has performed both ('Umra and Hajj)." I arrived at Mecca along
with him (i.e. the Prophet ) while I was menstruating, so I did not perform
the Tawaf around the Ka'ba or between Safa and Marwa. I informed Allah's
Apostle about that and he said, "Undo your braids and comb your hair, and
then assume the lhram for Hajj and leave the 'Umra." I did so, and when we
performed and finished the Hajj, Allah's Apostles sent me to At-Tanim along
with (my brother) 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr As-Siddiq, to perform the
'Umra. The Prophet said, "This 'Umra is in lieu of your missed 'Umra." Those
who had assumed the lhram for 'Umra, performed the Tawaf around the
Ka'ba and between Safa and Marwa, and then finished their Ihram, and on
their return from Mina, they performed another Tawaf (around the Ka'ba
and between Safa and Marwa), but those who combined their Hajj and
'Umra, performed only one Tawaf (between Safa and Marwa) (for both).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 679:
Narrated Ibn Juraij:
'Ata' said, "Ibn 'Abbas said, 'If he (i.e. the one intending to perform 'Umra)
has performed the Tawaf around the Ka'ba, his Ihram is considered to have
finished.' said, 'What proof does Ibn 'Abbas has as to this saying?" 'Ata' said,
"(The proof is taken) from the Statement of Allah:-- "And afterwards they
are brought For sacrifice unto Ancient House (Ka'ba at Mecca)" (22.33) and
from the order of the Prophet to his companions to finish their Ihram during
Hajjat-ul-Wada." I said (to 'Ata'), "That (i.e. finishing the Ihram) was after
coming form 'Arafat." 'Ata' said, "Ibn 'Abbas used to allow it before going to
'Arafat (after finishing the 'Umra) and after coming from it (i.e. after
performing the Hajj)."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 680:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari:
I came to the Prophet at a place called Al-Batha'. The Prophet said, "Did you
assume the Ihram for Hajj?" I said, "Yes," He said, "How did you express your
intention (for performing Hajj)? " I said, "Labbaik (i.e. I am ready) to assume
the Ihram with the same intention as that of Allah's Apostle." The Prophet
said, "Perform the Tawaf around the Ka'ba and between Safa and Marwa,
and then finish your Ihram." So I performed the Tawaf around the Ka'ba and
between Safa and Marwa and then I came to a woman from the tribe of
Qais who removed the lice from my head.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 681:
Narrated Hafsa:
(the wife of the Prophet) The Prophet ordered all his wives to finish their
Ihram during the year of Hajjat-ul-Wada. On that, I asked the Prophet "What
stops you from finishing your lhram?" He said, "I have matted my hair and
garlanded my Hadi. So I will not finish my Ihram unless I have slaughtered
my Hadi."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 682:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
A woman from the tribe of Khath'am asked for the verdict of Allah's Apostle
(regarding something) during Hajjat-ul-Wada' while Al-Fadl bin 'Abbas was
the companion-rider behind Allah's Apostle. She asked, "Allah's ordained
obligation (i.e. compulsory Hajj) enjoined on His slaves has become due on
my old father who cannot sit firmly on the riding animal. Will it be sufficient
if I perform the Hajj on his behalf?" He said, "Yes."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 683:
Narrated (Abdullah) bin 'Umar:
The Prophet arrived (at Mecca) in the year of the Conquest (of Mecca) while
Usama was riding behind him on (his she-camel)'. Al-Qaswa.' Bilal and
'Uthman bin Talha were accompanying him. When he made his she-camel
kneel down near the Ka'ba, he said to 'Uthman, "Get us the key (of the
Ka'ba). He brought the key to him and opened the gate (of the Ka'ba), for
him. The Prophet, Usama, Bilal and 'Uthman (bin Talha) entered the Ka'ba
and then closed the gate behind them (from inside). The Prophet stayed
there for a long period and then came out. The people rushed to get in, but I
went in before them and found Bilal standing behind the gate, and I said to
him, "Where did the Prophet pray?" He said, "He prayed between those two
front pillars." The Ka'ba was built on six pillars, arranged in two rows, and he
prayed between the two pillars of the front row leaving the gate of the
Ka'ba at his back and facing (in prayer) the wall which faces one when one
enters the Ka'ba. Between him and that wall (was the distance of about
three cubits). But I forgot to ask Bilal about the number of Rakat the
Prophet had prayed. There was a red piece of marble at the place where he
(i.e. the Prophet) had offered the prayer.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 684:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) Safiya bin Huyai, the wife of the Prophet
menstruated during Hajjat-ul-Wada' The Prophet said, "Is she going to
detain us?" I said to him, "She has already come to Mecca and performed
the Tawaf (ul-ifada) around the Ka'ba, O Allah's Apostle." The Prophet said,
" Let her then proceed on (to Medina)."
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 685:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
We were talking about Hajjat-ul-Wada, while the Prophet was amongst us.
We did not know what Hajjat-ul-Wada' signified. The Prophet praised Allah
and then mentioned Al-Masih Ad-Dajjal and described him extensively,
saying, "Allah did not send any prophet but that prophet warned his nation
of Al-Masih Ad-Dajjal. Noah and the prophets following him warned (their
people) of him. He will appear amongst you (O Muhammad's followers), and
if it happens that some of his qualities may be hidden from you, but your
Lord's State is clear to you and not hidden from you. The Prophet said it
thrice. Verily, your Lord is not blind in one eye, while he (i.e. Ad-Dajjal) is
blind in the right eye which looks like a grape bulging out (of its cluster). No
doubt,! Allah has made your blood and your properties sacred to one
another like the sanctity of this day of yours, in this town of yours, in this
month of yours." The Prophet added: No doubt! Haven't I conveyed Allah's
Message to you? " They replied, "Yes," The Prophet said thrice, "O Allah! Be
witness for it." The Prophet added, "Woe to you!" (or said), "May Allah be
merciful to you! Do not become infidels after me (i.e. my death) by cutting
the necks (throats) of one another."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 686:
Narrated Zaid bin Arqam:
The Prophet fought nineteen Ghazwas and performed only one Hajj after he
migrated (to Medina), and did not perform another Hajj after it, and that
was Hajj-ul-Wada,' Abu Ishaq said, "He performed when he was in Mecca."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 687:
Narrated Jarir:
The Prophet ordered me during Hajjatul-Wada'. "Ask the people to listen."
He then said, "Do not become infidels after me by cutting the necks
(throats) of one another. "

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 688:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
The Prophet said, "Time has taken its original shape which it had when Allah
created the Heavens and the Earth. The year is of twelve months, four of
which are sacred, and out of these (four) three are in succession, i.e. DhulQa'da, Dhul-Hijja and Al-Muharram, and the fourth is Rajab which is named
after the Mudar tribe, between (the month of) Jumaida (ath-thania) and
Sha'ban." Then the Prophet asked, "Which is this month?" We said, "Allah
and His Apostle know better." On that the Prophet kept quiet so long that
we thought that he might name it with another name. Then the Prophet
said, "Isn't it the month of Dhul-Hijja?" We replied, "Yes." Then he said,
"Which town is this?" "We replied, "Allah and His Apostle know better." On
that he kept quiet so long that we thought that he might name it with
another name. Then he said, "Isn't it the town of Mecca?" We replied, "Yes,
" Then he said, "Which day is today?" We replied, "Allah and His Apostle
know better." He kept quiet so long that we thought that he might name it
with another name. Then he said, "Isn't it the day of An-Nahr (i.e. sacrifice)?"
We replied, "Yes." He said, "So your blood, your properties, (The subnarrator Muhammad said, 'I think the Prophet also said: And your honor..)
are sacred to one another like the sanctity of this day of yours, in this city of
yours, in this month of yours; and surely, you will meet your Lord, and He
will ask you about your deeds. Beware! Do not become infidels after me,
cutting the throats of one another. It is incumbent on those who are present
to convey this message (of mine) to those who are absent. May be that
some of those to whom it will be conveyed will understand it better than
those who have actually heard it." (The sub-narrator, Muhammad, on
remembering that narration, used to say, "Muhammad spoke the truth!")
He (i.e. Prophet) then added twice, "No doubt! Haven't I conveyed (Allah's
Message) to you?"
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 689:
Narrated Tariq bin Shibab:
Some Jews said, "Had this Verse been revealed to us, we would have taken
that day as 'Id (festival)." 'Umar said, "What Verse?" They said:-- "This day I
have Perfected your religion for you, Completed My Favor upon you And
have chosen for you Islam as your religion" (5.3) 'Umar said, "I know the
place where it was revealed; It was revealed while Allah's Apostle was
staying at 'Arafat."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 690:
Narrated 'Aisha:
We set out with Allah's Apostle, and some of us assumed the lhram for
'Umra, some assumed it for Hajj, and some assumed it for both Hajj and
'Umra. Allah's Apostle assumed the Ihram for Hajj. So those who had
assumed the Ihram for Hajj or for both Hajj and 'Umra, did not finish their
Ihram till the day of An-Nahr (i.e. slaughter of sacrifices).

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 691:
Narrated Malik:
The same as above (Hadith 690), saying, "(We set out) with Allah's Apostle
in Hajjat-ul-Wada'...)"

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 692:
Narrated Malik:
The same as above (Hadith 690).
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 693:
Narrated Sad:
The Prophet visited me during Hajjat ul-Wada' while I was suffering from a
disease which brought me to the verge of death. I said, "O Allah's Apostle!
My ailment has reached such a (bad) state as you see, and I have much
wealth, but I have no-one to inherit from me except my only daughter. Shall
I give 2/3 of my property as alms (in charity)?" The Prophet said, "No," I said,
"Shall I give half of my property as alms?" He said, "No." I said, "(Shall I give)
1/3 of it? " He replied, " 1/3, and even 1/3 is too much. It is better for you to
leave your inheritors wealthy rather than to leave them poor, begging
people (for their sustenance); and whatever you spend for Allah's Sake, you
will get reward for it even for the morsel of food which you put in your
wives mouth." I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Should I remain (in Mecca) behind
my companions (who are going with you to Medina)?" The Prophet said, "If
you remain behind, any good deed which you will do for Allah's Sake, will
upgrade and elevate you. May be you will live longer so that some people
may benefit by you and some other (i.e. infidels) may get harmed by you."
The Prophet then added, "O Allah! Complete the Migration of my
companions and do not turn them on their heels. But the poor Sad bin
Khaula (not the above mentioned Sad) (died in Mecca) ." Allah's Apostle
pitied Sad for he died in Mecca.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 694:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet got his head shaved during Hajjat-ul-Wada.'

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 695:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
During Hajjat-ul-Wada', the Prophet and some of his companions got their
heads shaved while some of his companions got their head-hair cut short.
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 696:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
That he came riding a donkey when Allah 's Apostle was standing at Mina
during Hajjat-ul-Wada', leading the people in prayer. The donkey passed in
front of a part of the row (of the people offering the prayer). Then he
dismounted from it and took his position in the row with the people.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 697:
Narrated Hisham's father:
In my presence, Usama was asked about the speed of the Prophet during his
Hajj. He replied, "It was Al-'Anaq (i.e. moderate easy speed) and if he
encountered an open space, he used to increase his speed."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 698:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Yazid Al-Khatmi:
That Abu Aiyub informed him that he offered the Maghrib and 'Isha' prayers
together with the Prophet during Hajjat-ul-Wada.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 699:
Narrated Abu Musa:
My Companions sent me to Allah's Apostle to ask him for some animals to
ride on as they were accompanying him in the army of Al-Usra, and that was
the Ghazwa (Battle) of Tabuk, I said, "O Allah's Prophet! My companions
have sent me to you to provide them with means of transportation." He
said, "By Allah! I will not make you ride anything." It happened that when I
reached him, he was in an angry mood, and I didn't notice it. So I returned in
a sad mood because of the refusal the Prophet and for the fear that th
Prophet might have become 'angry with me. So I returned to my
companions and informed them of what the Prophet had said. Only a short
while had passed when I heard Bilal calling, "O 'Abdullah bin Qais!" I replied
to his call. Bilal said, "Respond to Allah's Apostle who is calling you." When I
went to him (i.e. the Prophet), he said, "Take these two camels tied
together and also these two camels tied together,"' referring to six camels
he had brought them from Sad at that time. The Prophet added, "Take them
to your companions and say, 'Allah (or Allah's Apostle ) allows you to ride on
these,' so ride on them." So I took those camels to them and said, "The
Prophet allows you to ride on these (camels) but by Allah, I will not leave
you till some of you proceed with me to somebody who heard the
statement of Allah's Apostle. Do not think that I narrate to you a thing which
Allah's Apostle has not said." They said to me, "We consider you truthful,
and we will do what you like." The sub-narrator added: So Abu Musa
proceeded along with some of them till they came to those who have heard
the statement of Allah's Apostle wherein he denied them (some animals to
ride on) and (his statement) whereby he gave them the same. So these
people told them the same information as Abu Musa had told them.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 700:
Narrated Sad:
Allah's Apostle set out for Tabuk. appointing 'Ali as his deputy (in Medina).
'Ali said, "Do you want to leave me with the children and women?" The
Prophet said, "Will you not be pleased that you will be to me like Aaron to
Moses? But there will be no prophet after me."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 701:
Narrated Safwan bin Yala bin Umaiya:
that his father said, "I participated in Al-Usra (i.e. Tabuk) along with the
Prophet." Yala added, "(My participation in) that Ghazwa was the best of
my deeds to me." Ya'la said, "I had a laborer who quarrelled with somebody,
and one of the two bit the hand of the other ('Ata', the sub-narrator, said,
"Safwan told me who bit whom but I forgot it"), and the one who was
bitten, pulled his hand out of the mouth of the biter, so one of the incisors
of the biter was broken. So we came to the Prophet and he considered the
biter's claim as invalid (i.e. the biter did not get a recompense for his broken
incisor). The Prophet said, "Should he leave his hand in your mouth so that
you might snap it as if it were in the mouth of a male camel to snap it?"

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 702:
Narrated Abdullah bin Kab bin Malik:
Who, from among Kab's sons, was the guide of Kab when he became blind: I
heard Kab bin Malik narrating the story of (the Ghazwa of) Tabuk in which
he failed to take part. Kab said, "I did not remain behind Allah's Apostle in
any Ghazwa that he fought except the Ghazwa of Tabuk, and I failed to take
part in the Ghazwa of Badr, but Allah did not admonish anyone who had not
participated in it, for in fact, Allah's Apostle had gone out in search of the
caravan of Quraish till Allah made them (i.e. the Muslims) and their enemy
meet without any appointment. I witnessed the night of Al-'Aqaba (pledge)
with Allah's Apostle when we pledged for Islam, and I would not exchange it
for the Badr battle although the Badr battle is more popular amongst the
people than it (i.e. Al-'Aqaba pledge). As for my news (in this battle of
Tabuk), I had never been stronger or wealthier than I was when I remained
behind the Prophet in that Ghazwa.
By Allah, never had I two she-camels before, but I had then at the time of
this Ghazwa. Whenever Allah's Apostle wanted to make a Ghazwa, he used
to hide his intention by apparently referring to different Ghazwa till it was
the time of that Ghazwa (of Tabuk) which Allah's Apostle fought in severe
heat, facing, a long journey, desert, and the great number of enemy. So the
Prophet announced to the Muslims clearly (their destination) so that they
might get prepared for their Ghazwa. So he informed them clearly of the
destination he was going to. Allah's Apostle was accompanied by a large
number of Muslims who could not be listed in a book namely, a register."
Ka'b added, "Any man who intended to be absent would think that the
matter would remain hidden unless Allah revealed it through Divine
Revelation. So Allah's Apostle fought that Ghazwa at the time when the
fruits had ripened and the shade looked pleasant. Allah's Apostle and his
companions prepared for the battle and I started to go out in order to get
myself ready along with them, but I returned without doing anything. I
would say to myself, 'I can do that.' So I kept on delaying it every now and
then till the people got ready and Allah's Apostle and the Muslims along
with him departed, and I had not prepared anything for my departure, and I
said, I will prepare myself (for departure) one or two days after him, and
then join them.' In the morning following their departure, I went out to get
myself ready but returned having done nothing. Then again in the next
morning, I went out to get ready but returned without doing anything.
Such was the case with me till they hurried away and the battle was missed
(by me). Even then I intended to depart to take them over. I wish I had done
so! But it was not in my luck. So, after the departure of Allah's Apostle,
whenever I went out and walked amongst the people (i.e, the remaining
persons), it grieved me that I could see none around me, but one accused of
hypocrisy or one of those weak men whom Allah had excused. Allah's
Apostle did not remember me till he reached Tabuk. So while he was sitting
amongst the people in Tabuk, he said, 'What did Ka'b do?' A man from Banu
Salama said, 'O Allah's Apostle! He has been stopped by his two Burdas (i.e.
garments) and his looking at his own flanks with pride.' Then Mu'adh bin
Jabal said, 'What a bad thing you have said! By Allah! O Allahs Apostle! We
know nothing about him but good.' Allah's Apostle kept silent." Ka'b bin
Malik added, "When I heard that he (i.e. the Prophet ) was on his way back
to Medina. I got dipped in my concern, and began to think of false excuses,
saying to myself, 'How can I avoid his anger tomorrow?' And I took the
advice of wise member of my family in this matter. When it was said that
Allah's Apostle, had come near all the evil false excuses abandoned from my
mind and I knew well that I could never come out of this problem by forging
a false statement. Then I decided firmly to speak the truth. So Allah's
Apostle arrived in the morning, and whenever he returned from a journey.,
he used to visit the Mosque first of all and offer a two-Rak'at prayer therein
and then sit for the people. So when he had done all that (this time), those
who had failed to join the battle (of Tabuk) came and started offering (false)
excuses and taking oaths before him. They were something over eighty
men; Allah's Apostle accepted the excuses they had expressed, took their
pledge of allegiance asked for Allah's Forgiveness for them, and left the
secrets of their hearts for Allah to judge. Then I came to him, and when I
greeted him, he smiled a smile of an angry person and then said, 'Come on.'
So I came walking till I sat before him. He said to me, 'What stopped you
from joining us. Had you not purchased an animal For carrying you?' I
answered, "Yes, O Allah's Apostle! But by Allah, if I were sitting before any
person from among the people of the world other than you, I would have
avoided his anger with an excuse.
By Allah, I have been bestowed with the power of speaking fluently and
eloquently, but by Allah, I knew well that if today I tell you a lie to seek your
favor, Allah would surely make you angry with me in the near future, but if I
tell you the truth, though you will get angry because of it, I hope for Allah's
Forgiveness. Really, by Allah, there was no excuse for me. By Allah, I had
never been stronger or wealthier than I was when I remained behind you.'
Then Allah's Apostle said, 'As regards this man, he has surely told the truth.
So get up till Allah decides your case.' I got up, and many men of Banu
Salama followed me and said to me. 'By Allah, we never witnessed you
doing any sin before this. Surely, you failed to offer excuse to Allah's Apostle
as the others who did not join him, have offered. The prayer of Allah's
Apostle to Allah to forgive you would have been sufficient for you.' By Allah,
they continued blaming me so much that I intended to return (to the
Prophet) and accuse myself of having told a lie, but I said to them, 'Is there
anybody else who has met the same fate as I have?' They replied, 'Yes, there
are two men who have said the same thing as you have, and to both of them
was given the same order as given to you.' I said, 'Who are they?' They
replied, Murara bin Ar-Rabi Al-Amri and Hilal bin Umaiya Al-Waqifi.' By that
they mentioned to me two pious men who had attended the Ghazwa
(Battle) of Badr, and in whom there was an example for me. So I did not
change my mind when they mentioned them to me. Allah's Apostle forbade
all the Muslims to talk to us, the three aforesaid persons out of all those
who had remained behind in that Ghazwa. So we kept away from the people
and they changed their attitude towards us till the very land (where I lived)
appeared strange to me as if I did not know it.
We remained in that condition for fifty nights. As regards my two fellows,
they remained in their houses and kept on weeping, but I was the youngest
of them and the firmest of them, so I used to go out and witness the prayers
along with the Muslims and roam about in the markets, but none would talk
to me, and I would come to Allah's Apostle and greet him while he was
sitting In his gathering after the prayer, and I would wonder whether the
Prophet did move his lips in return to my greetings or not. Then I would
offer my prayer near to him and look at him stealthily. When I was busy with
my prayer, he would turn his face towards me, but when I turned my face to
him, he would turn his face away from me. When this harsh attitude of the
people lasted long, I walked till I scaled the wall of the garden of Abu
Qatada who was my cousin and dearest person to me, and I offered my
greetings to him. By Allah, he did not return my greetings. I said, 'O Abu
Qatada! I beseech you by Allah! Do you know that I love Allah and His
Apostle?' He kept quiet. I asked him again, beseeching him by Allah, but he
remained silent. Then I asked him again in the Name of Allah. He said, "Allah
and His Apostle know it better.' Thereupon my eyes flowed with tears and I
returned and jumped over the wall." Ka'b added, "While I was walking in the
market of Medina, suddenly I saw a Nabati (i.e. a Christian farmer) from the
Nabatis of Sham who came to sell his grains in Medina, saying, 'Who will
lead me to Kab bin Malik?' The people began to point (me) out for him till he
came to me and handed me a letter from the king of Ghassan in which the
following was written:
"To proceed, I have been informed that your friend (i.e. the Prophet ) has
treated you harshly. Anyhow, Allah does not let you live at a place where
you feel inferior and your right is lost. So join us, and we will console you."
When I read it, I said to myself, 'This is also a sort of a test.' Then I took the
letter to the oven and made a fire therein by burning it. When forty out of
the fifty nights elapsed, behold ! There came to me the messenger of Allah's
Apostle and said, 'Allah's Apostle orders you to keep away from your wife,' I
said, 'Should I divorce her; or else! what should I do?' He said, 'No, only keep
aloof from her and do not cohabit her.' The Prophet sent the same message
to my two fellows. Then I said to my wife. 'Go to your parents and remain
with them till Allah gives His Verdict in this matter." Kab added, "The wife of
Hilal bin Umaiya came to Apostle and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Hilal bin
Umaiya is a helpless old man who has no servant to attend on him. Do you
dislike that I should serve him? ' He said, 'No (you can serve him) but he
should not come near you.' She said, 'By Allah, he has no desire for anything.
By, Allah, he has never ceased weeping till his case began till this day of his.'
On that, some of my family members said to me, 'Will you also ask Allah's
Apostle to permit your wife (to serve you) as he has permitted the wife of
Hilal bin Umaiya to serve him?' I said, 'By Allah, I will not ask the permission
of Allah's Apostle regarding her, for I do not know What Allah's Apostle
would say if I asked him to permit her (to serve me) while I am a young
man.' Then I remained in that state for ten more nights after that till the
period of fifty nights was completed starting from the time when Allah's
Apostle prohibited the people from talking to us. When I had offered the
Fajr prayer on the 50th morning on the roof of one of our houses and while I
was sitting in the condition which Allah described (in the Quran) i.e. my very
soul seemed straitened to me and even the earth seemed narrow to me for
all its spaciousness, there I heard the voice of one who had ascended the
mountain of Sala' calling with his loudest voice, 'O Kab bin Malik! Be happy
(by receiving good tidings).' I fell down in prostration before Allah, realizing
that relief has come. Allah's Apostle had announced the acceptance of our
repentance by Allah when he had offered the Fajr prayer. The people then
went out to congratulate us. Some bringers of good tidings went out to my
two fellows, and a horseman came to me in haste, and a man of Banu Aslam
came running and ascended the mountain and his voice was swifter than the
horse. When he (i.e. the man) whose voice I had heard, came to me
conveying the good tidings, I took off my garments and dressed him with
them; and by Allah, I owned no other garments than them on that day. Then
I borrowed two garments and wore them and went to Allah's Apostle.
The people started receiving me in batches, congratulating me on Allah's
Acceptance of my repentance, saying, 'We congratulate you on Allah's
Acceptance of your repentance." Kab further said, "When I entered the
Mosque. I saw Allah's Apostle sitting with the people around him. Talha bin
Ubaidullah swiftly came to me, shook hands with me and congratulated me.
By Allah, none of the Muhajirin (i.e. Emigrants) got up for me except him
(i.e. Talha), and I will never forget this for Talha." Kab added, "When I
greeted Allah's Apostle he, his face being bright with joy, said "Be happy
with the best day that you have got ever since your mother delivered you."
Kab added, "I said to the Prophet 'Is this forgiveness from you or from
Allah?' He said, 'No, it is from Allah.' Whenever Allah's Apostle became
happy, his face would shine as if it were a piece of moon, and we all knew
that characteristic of him. When I sat before him, I said, 'O Allah's Apostle!
Because of the acceptance of my repentance I will give up all my wealth as
alms for the Sake of Allah and His Apostle. Allah's Apostle said, 'Keep some
of your wealth, as it will be better for you.' I said, 'So I will keep my share
from Khaibar with me,' and added, 'O Allah's Apostle! Allah has saved me for
telling the truth; so it is a part of my repentance not to tell but the truth as
long as I am alive. By Allah, I do not know anyone of the Muslims whom
Allah has helped fortelling the truth more than me. Since I have mentioned
that truth to Allah's Apostle till today, I have never intended to tell a lie. I
hope that Allah will also save me (from telling lies) the rest of my life. So
Allah revealed to His Apostle the Verse:-"Verily, Allah has forgiven the Prophet, the Muhajirin (i.e. Emigrants (up to
His Saying) And be with those who are true (in word and deed)." (9.117-119)
By Allah, Allah has never bestowed upon me, apart from His guiding me to
Islam, a Greater blessing than the fact that I did not tell a lie to Allah's
Apostle which would have caused me to perish as those who have told a lie
perished, for Allah described those who told lies with the worst description
He ever attributed to anybody else. Allah said:-- "They (i.e. the hypocrites)
will swear by Allah to you when you return to them (up to His Saying)
Certainly Allah is not pleased with the rebellious people--" (9.95-96) Kab
added, "We, the three persons, differed altogether from those whose
excuses Allah's Apostle accepted when they swore to him. He took their
pledge of allegiance and asked Allah to forgive them, but Allah's Apostle left
our case pending till Allah gave His Judgment about it. As for that Allah
said):-- And to the three (He did for give also) who remained behind." (9.118)
What Allah said (in this Verse) does not indicate our failure to take part in
the Ghazwa, but it refers to the deferment of making a decision by the
Prophet about our case in contrast to the case of those who had taken an
oath before him and he excused them by accepting their excuses.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 703:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
When the Prophet passed by Al-Hijr, he said, "Do not enter the dwelling
places of those people who were unjust to themselves unless you enter in a
weeping state lest the same calamity as of theirs should befall you." Then he
covered his head and made his speed fast till he crossed the valley.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 704:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
Allah's Apostle said to his companions who were at Al-Hijr, "Do not enter
upon these people who are being punished, except in a weeping state, lest
the same calamity as of theirs should befall you..."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 705:
Narrated Urwa bin Al-Mughira:
Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba, said, "The Prophet went out to answer the call of
nature and (when he had finished) I got up to pour water for him." I think
that he said that the event had taken place during the Ghazwa of Tabuk. AlMughira added. "The Prophet washed his face, and when he wanted to
wash his forearms, the sleeves of his cloak became tight over them, so he
took them out from underneath the cloak and then he washed them (i.e. his
forearms) and passed wet hands over his Khuffs."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 706:
Narrated Abu Humaid: We returned in the company of the Prophet from the
Ghazwa of Tabuk, and when we looked upon Medina, the Prophet said,
"This is Taba (i.e. Medina), and this is Uhud, a mountain that loves us and is
loved by us."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 707:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle returned from the Ghazwa of Tabuk, and when he
approached Medina, he said, "There are some people in Medina who were
with you all the time, you did not travel any portion of the journey nor
crossed any valley, but they were with you they (i.e. the people) said, "O
Allah's Apostle! Even though they were at Medina?" He said, "Yes, because
they were stopped by a genuine excuse."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 708:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Allah's Apostle sent a letter to Khosrau with Abdullah bin Hudhafa As-Sahmi
and told him to hand it over to the governor of Al-Bahrain. The governor of
Al-Bahrain handed it over to Khosrau, and when he read the latter, he tore it
into pieces. (The sub-narrator added, "I think that Ibn Al-Musaiyab said,
'Allah 's Apostle invoked (Allah) to tear them all totally Khosrau and his
companions) into pieces.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 709:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
During the days (of the battle) of Al-Jamal, Allah benefited me with a word I
had heard from Allah's Apostle after I had been about to join the
Companions of Al-Jamal (i.e. the camel) and fight along with them. When
Allah's Apostle was informed that the Persians had crowned the daughter of
Khosrau as their ruler, he said, "Such people as ruled by a lady will never be
successful."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 710:
Narrated As-Sa'ib bin Yazid:
I remember that I went out with the boys to (the place called) Thaniyat-ulWada to receive Allah's Apostle .

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 711:
Narrated As-Saib:
I remember I went out with the boys to Thaniyat-ul-Wada' to receive the
Prophet when he returned from the Ghazwa of Tabuk.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 712:
Narrated Um Al-Fadl bint Al-Harith:
I heard the Prophet reciting Surat-al-Mursalat 'Urfan (77) in the Maghrib
prayer, and after that prayer he did not lead us in any prayer till he died.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 713:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
'Umar bin Al-Khattab used to let Ibn Abbas sit beside him, so 'AbdurRahman
bin 'Auf said to 'Umar, "We have sons similar to him." 'Umar replied, "(I
respect him) because of his status that you know." 'Umar then asked Ibn
'Abbas about the meaning of this Holy Verse:-- "When comes the help of
Allah and the conquest of Mecca . . ." (110.1)
Ibn 'Abbas replied, "That indicated the death of Allah's Apostle which Allah
informed him of." 'Umar said, "I do not understand of it except what you
understand."
Narrated 'Aisha: The Prophet in his ailment in which he died, used to say, "O
'Aisha! I still feel the pain caused by the food I ate at Khaibar, and at this
time, I feel as if my aorta is being cut from that poison."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 714:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Whenever Allah's Apostle became ill, he used to recite Al-Muawidhatan (i.e.
the last two Suras of the Qur'an) and then blow his breath and passed his
hand over himself. When he had his fatal illness, I started reciting AlMuawidhatan and blowing my breath over him as he used to do, and then I
rubbed the hand of the Prophet over his body.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 715:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I heard the Prophet and listened to him before his death while he was Lying
supported on his back, and he was saying, "O Allah! Forgive me, and bestow
Your Mercy on me, and let me meet the (highest) companions (of the
Hereafter)." See the Qur'an (4.69) and See Hadith No. 719.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 716:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Thursday! And how great that Thursday was! The ailment of Allah's Apostle
became worse (on Thursday) and he said, fetch me something so that I may
write to you something after which you will never go astray." The people
(present there) differed in this matter, and it was not right to differ before a
prophet. Some said, "What is wrong with him ? (Do you think ) he is delirious
(seriously ill)? Ask him ( to understand his state )." So they went to the
Prophet and asked him again. The Prophet said, "Leave me, for my present
state is better than what you call me for." Then he ordered them to do three
things. He said, "Turn the pagans out of the 'Arabian Peninsula; respect and
give gifts to the foreign delegations as you have seen me dealing with
them." (Said bin Jubair, the sub-narrator said that Ibn Abbas kept quiet as
rewards the third order, or he said, "I forgot it.") (See Hadith No. 116 Vol. 1)

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 717:
Narrated Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah:
Ibn Abbas said, "When Allah's Apostle was on his deathbed and there were
some men in the house, he said, 'Come near, I will write for you something
after which you will not go astray.' Some of them ( i.e. his companions) said,
'Allah's Apostle is seriously ill and you have the (Holy) Quran. Allah's Book is
sufficient for us.' So the people in the house differed and started disputing.
Some of them said, 'Give him writing material so that he may write for you
something after which you will not go astray.' while the others said the
other way round. So when their talk and differences increased, Allah's
Apostle said, "Get up." Ibn Abbas used to say, "No doubt, it was very
unfortunate (a great disaster) that Allah's Apostle was prevented from
writing for them that writing because of their differences and noise."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 718:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet called Fatima during his fatal illness and told her something
secretly and she wept. Then he called her again and told her something
secretly, and she started laughing. When we asked her about that, she said,
"The Prophet first told me secretly that he would expire in that disease in
which he died, so I wept; then he told me secretly that I would be the first of
his family to follow him, so I laughed ( at that time)."
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 719:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Used to hear (from the Prophet) that no Prophet dies till he is given the
option to select either the worldly life or the life of the Hereafter. I heard the
Prophet in his fatal disease, with his voice becoming hoarse, saying, "In the
company of those on whom is the grace of Allah ..( to the end of the Verse
)." (4.69) Thereupon I thought that the Prophet had been given the option.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 720:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When the Prophet fell ill in his fatal illness, he started saying, "With the
highest companion."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 721:
Narrated Aisha:
When Allah 's Apostle was in good health, he used to say, "Never does a
prophet die unless he is shown his place in Paradise ( before his death ), and
then he is made alive or given option." When the Prophet became ill and his
last moments came while his head was on my thigh, he became
unconscious, and when he came to his senses, he looked towards the roof
of the house and then said, "O Allah! (Please let me be) with the highest
companion." Thereupon I said, "Hence he is not going to stay with us? "
Then I came to know that his state was the confirmation of the narration he
used to mention to us while he was in good health.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 722:
Narrated Aisha:
'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr entered upon the Prophet while I was
supporting the Prophet on my chest. 'AbdurRahman had a fresh Siwak then
and he was cleaning his teeth with it. Allah's Apostle looked at it, so I took
the Siwak, cut it (chewed it with my teeth), shook it and made it soft (with
water), and then gave it to the Prophet who cleaned his teeth with it. I had
never seen Allah's Apostle cleaning his teeth in a better way. After finishing
the brushing of his teeth, he lifted his hand or his finger and said thrice, "O
Allah! Let me be with the highest companions," and then died. 'Aisha used
to say, "He died while his head was resting between my chest and chin."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 723:
Narrated Aisha:
Whenever Allah's Apostle became ill, he used to recite the Muawidhatan
and blow his breath over himself (after their recitation ) and rubbed his
hands over his body. So when he was afflicted with his fatal illness. I started
reciting the Muawidhatan and blowing my breath over him as he used to
blow and made the hand of the Prophet pass over his body.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 724:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I heard the Prophet and listened to him before his death while he was
leaning his back on me and saying, "O Allah! Forgive me, and bestow Your
Mercy on me, and let me meet the companions."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 725:
Narrated Urwa bin Az-Zubair:
'Aisha said, "The Prophet said during his fatal illness, "Allah cursed the Jews
for they took the graves of their prophets as places for worship." 'Aisha
added, "Had it not been for that (statement of the Prophet ) his grave
would have been made conspicuous. But he was afraid that it might be
taken as a place for worship."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 726:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet died while he was between my chest and chin, so I never dislike
the death agony for anyone after the Prophet.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 727:
Narrated Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) "When the ailment of Allah's Apostle became
aggravated, he requested his wives to permit him to be (treated) nursed in
my house, and they gave him permission. He came out (to my house),
walking between two men with his feet dragging on the ground, between
'Abbas bin 'Abdul--Muttalib and another man" 'Ubaidullah said, "I told
'Abdullah of what 'Aisha had said, 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas said to me, 'Do you
know who is the other man whom 'Aisha did not name?' I said, 'No.' Ibn
'Abbas said, 'It was 'Ali bin Abu Talib." 'Aisha, the wife of the Prophet used
to narrate saying, "When Allah's Apostle entered my house and his disease
became aggravated, he said, " Pour on me the water of seven water skins,
the mouths of which have not been untied, so that I may give advice to the
people.' So we let him sit in a big basin belonging to Hafsa, the wife of the
Prophet and then started to pour water on him from these water skins till he
started pointing to us with his hands intending to say, 'You have done your
job." 'Aisha added, "Then he went out to the people and led them in prayer
and preached to them." 'Aisha and 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas said, "When Allah's
Apostle became ill seriously, he started covering his face with his woolen
sheet, and when he felt short of breath, he removed it from hi; face and
said, 'That is so! Allah's (curse be on the Jews and the Christians, as they
took the graves of their prophets as (places of worship),' intending to warn
(the Muslims ) of what they had done." 'Aisha added, "I argued with Allah's
Apostle repeatedly about that matter (i.e. his order that Abu Bakr should
lead the people in prayer in his place when he was ill), and what made me
argue so much, was, that it never occurred to my mind that after the
Prophet, the people would ever love a man who had taken his place, and I
felt that anybody standing in his place, would be a bad omen to the people,
so I wanted Allah's Apostle to give up the idea of choosing Abu Bakr (to lead
the people in prayer)."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 728:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abbas:
Ali bin Abu Talib came out of the house of Allah's Apostle during his fatal
illness. The people asked, "O Abu Hasan (i.e. Ali)! How is the health of Allah's
Apostle this morning?" 'Ali replied, "He has recovered with the Grace of
Allah." 'Abbas bin 'Abdul Muttalib held him by the hand and said to him, "In
three days you, by Allah, will be ruled (by somebody else ), And by Allah, I
feel that Allah's Apostle will die from this ailment of his, for I know how the
faces of the offspring of 'Abdul Muttalib look at the time of their death. So
let us go to Allah's Apostle and ask him who will take over the Caliphate. If it
is given to us we will know as to it, and if it is given to somebody else, we
will inform him so that he may tell the new ruler to take care of us." 'Ali said,
"By Allah, if we asked Allah's Apostle for it (i.e. the Caliphate) and he denied
it us, the people will never give it to us after that. And by Allah, I will not ask
Allah's Apostle for it."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 729:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
While the Muslims were offering the Fajr prayer on Monday and Abu Bakr
was leading them in prayer, suddenly Allah's Apostle lifted the curtain of
'Aisha's dwelling and looked at them while they were in the rows of the
prayers and smiled. Abu Bakr retreated to join the row, thinking that Allah's
Apostle wanted to come out for the prayer. The Muslims were about to be
put to trial in their prayer (i.e. were about to give up praying) because of
being overjoyed at seeing Allah's Apostle. But Allah's Apostle beckoned
them with his hand to complete their prayer and then entered the dwelling
and let fall the curtain.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 730:
Narrated Aisha:
It was one of the favors of Allah towards me that Allah's Apostle expired in
my house on the day of my turn while he was leaning against my chest and
Allah made my saliva mix with his saliva at his death. 'Abdur-Rahman
entered upon me with a Siwak in his hand and I was supporting (the back of)
Allah's Apostle (against my chest ). I saw the Prophet looking at it (i.e.
Siwak) and I knew that he loved the Siwak, so I said ( to him ), "Shall I take it
for you ? " He nodded in agreement. So I took it and it was too stiff for him
to use, so I said, "Shall I soften it for you ?" He nodded his approval. So I
softened it and he cleaned his teeth with it. In front of him there was a jug
or a tin, (The sub-narrator, 'Umar is in doubt as to which was right)
containing water. He started dipping his hand in the water and rubbing his
face with it, he said, "None has the right to be worshipped except Allah.
Death has its agonies." He then lifted his hands (towards the sky) and
started saying, "With the highest companion," till he expired and his hand
dropped down.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 731:
Narrated Urwa:
'Aisha said, "Allah's Apostle in his fatal illness, used to ask, 'Where will I be
tomorrow? Where will I be tomorrow?", seeking 'Aisha's turn. His wives
allowed him to stay wherever he wished. So he stayed at 'Aisha's house till
he expired while he was with her." 'Aisha added, "The Prophet expired on
the day of my turn in my house and he was taken unto Allah while his head
was against my chest and his saliva mixed with my saliva." 'Aisha added,
"Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr came in, carrying a Siwak he was cleaning his
teeth with. Allah's Apostle looked at it and I said to him, 'O 'AbdurRahman!
Give me this Siwak.' So he gave it to me and I cut it, chewed it (it's end) and
gave it to Allah's Apostle who cleaned his teeth with it while he was resting
against my chest."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 732:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet expired in my house and on the day of my turn, leaning against
my chest. One of us (i.e. the Prophet's wives ) used to recite a prayer asking
Allah to protect him from all evils when he became sick. So I started asking
Allah to protect him from all evils (by reciting a prayer ). He raised his head
towards the sky and said, "With the highest companions, with the highest
companions." 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr passed carrying a fresh leaf-stalk
of a date-palm and the Prophet looked at it and I thought that the Prophet
was in need of it (for cleaning his teeth ). So I took it (from 'Abdur Rahman)
and chewed its head and shook it and gave it to the Prophet who cleaned
his teeth with it, in the best way he had ever cleaned his teeth, and then he
gave it to me, and suddenly his hand dropped down or it fell from his hand
(i.e. he expired). So Allah made my saliva mix with his saliva on his last day
on earth and his first day in the Hereafter.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 733:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Abu Bakr came from his house at As-Sunh on a horse. He dismounted and
entered the Mosque, but did not speak to the people till he entered upon
'Aisha and went straight to Allah's Apostle who was covered with Hibra
cloth (i.e. a kind of Yemenite cloth). He then uncovered the Prophet's face
and bowed over him and kissed him and wept, saying, "Let my father and
mother be sacrificed for you. By Allah, Allah will never cause you to die
twice. As for the death which was written for you, has come upon you."
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: Abu Bakr went out while Umar bin Al-Khattab was
talking to the people. Abu Bakr said, "Sit down, O 'Umar!" But 'Umar
refused to sit down. So the people came to Abu Bakr and left Umar. Abu
Bakr said, "To proceed, if anyone amongst you used to worship Muhammad
, then Muhammad is dead, but if (anyone of) you used to worship Allah,
then Allah is Alive and shall never die. Allah said:--"Muhammad is no more
than an Apostle, and indeed (many) apostles have passed away before
him..(till the end of the Verse )......Allah will reward to those who are
thankful." (3.144) By Allah, it was as if the people never knew that Allah had
revealed this Verse before till Abu Bakr recited it and all the people received
it from him, and I heard everybody reciting it (then).
Narrated Az-Zuhri: Said bin Al-Musaiyab told me that 'Umar said, "By Allah,
when I heard Abu Bakr reciting it, my legs could not support me and I fell
down at the very moment of hearing him reciting it, declaring that the
Prophet had died."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 734:
Narrated Aisha and Ibn Abbas:
Abu Bakr kissed the Prophet after his death.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 735:
Narrated 'Aisha:
We poured medicine in one side of the Prophet's mouth during his illness
and he started pointing to us, meaning to say, "Don't pour medicine in my
mouth." We said, "(He says so) because a patient dislikes medicines." When
he improved and felt a little better, he said, "Didn't I forbid you to pour
medicine in my mouth ?" We said, " ( We thought it was because of) the
dislike, patients have for medicines. He said, "Let everyone present in the
house be given medicine by pouring it in his mouth while I am looking at
him, except 'Abbas as he has not witnessed you (doing the same to me)."
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 736:
Narrated Al-Aswad:
It was mentioned in the presence of 'Aisha that the Prophet had appointed
'Ali as successor by will. Thereupon she said, "Who said so? I saw the
Prophet, while I was supporting him against my chest. He asked for a tray,
and then fell on one side and expired, and I did not feel it. So how (do the
people say) he appointed 'Ali as his successor?"

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 737:
Narrated Talha:
I asked 'Abdullah bin Abu 'Aufa "Did the Prophet make a will? ' He replied,
"No." I further asked, "How comes it that the making of a will was enjoined
on the people or that they were ordered to make it? " He said, "The Prophet
made a will concerning Allah's Book."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 738:
Narrated 'Amir bin Al-Harith:
Allah's Apostle did not leave a Dinar or a Dirham or a male or a female slave.
He left only his white mule on which he used to ride, and his weapons, and a
piece of land which he gave in charity for the needy travelers.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 739:
Narrated Anas:
When the ailment of the Prophet got aggravated, he became unconscious
whereupon Fatima said, "Oh, how distressed my father is!" He said, "Your
father will have no more distress after today." When he expired, she said, "O
Father! Who has responded to the call of the Lord Who has invited him! 
Father, whose dwelling place is the Garden of Paradise (i.e. Al-Firdaus)! O
Father! We convey this news (of your death) to Gabriel." When he was
buried, Fatima said, "O Anas! Do you feel pleased to throw earth over Allah's
Apostle?"

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 740:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When the Prophet was healthy, he used to say, "No soul of a prophet is
captured till he is shown his place in Paradise and then he is given the
option." When death approached him while his head was on my thigh, he
became unconscious and then recovered his consciousness. He then looked
at the ceiling of the house and said, "O Allah! (with) the highest
companions." I said (to myself), "Hence, he is not going to choose us." Then
I realized that what he had said was the application of the narration which
he used to mention to us when he was healthy. The last word he spoke was,
"O Allah! (with) the highest companion."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 741:
Narrated Aisha and Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet stayed for ten years in Mecca with the Qur'an being revealed to
him and he stayed in Medina for ten years.'

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 742:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah 's Apostle died when he was sixty-three years of age.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 743:
Narrated 'Aisha
The Prophet died while his armor was mortgaged to a Jew for thirty Sa's of
barley.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 744:
Narrated Salim's father:
The Prophet appointed Usama as the commander of the troops (to be sent
to Syria). The Muslims spoke about Usama (unfavorably ). The Prophet said,
" I have been informed that you spoke about Usama. (Let it be known that )
he is the most beloved of all people to me."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 745:
Narrated Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle sent troops appointed Usama bin Zaid as their commander.
The people criticized his leadership. Allah's Apostle got up and said, "If you
(people) are criticizing his (i.e. Usama's) leadership you used to criticize the
leadership of his father before. By Allah, he (i.e. Zaid) deserved the
leadership indeed, and he used to be one of the most beloved persons to
me, and now this (i.e. his son, Usama) is one of the most beloved persons to
me after him."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 746:
Narrated Ibn Abu Habib:
Abu Al-Khair said, "As-Sanabih, I asked (me), 'When did you migrate?' I (i.e.
Abu Al-Khair) said, 'We went out from Yemen as emigrants and arrived at AlJuhfa, and there came a rider whom I asked about the news. The rider said:
We buried the Prophet five days ago." I asked (As-Sanabihi), 'Did you hear
anything about the night of Qadr?' He replied, 'Bilal, the Mu'adhdhin of the
Prophet informed me that it is on one of the seven nights of the last ten
days (of Ramadan)."
Volume 5, Book 59, Number 747:
Narrated Abu Ishaq:
I asked Zaid bin Al-Arqam, "In how many Ghazawat did you take part in the
company of Allah's Apostle?" He replied, "Seventeen." I further asked, "How
many Ghazawat did the Prophet fight?" He replied, "Nineteen."

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 748:
Narrated Al-Bara:
I fought fifteen Ghazawat in the company of the Prophet.

Volume 5, Book 59, Number 749:
Narrated Buraida:
That he fought sixteen Ghazawat with Allah's Apostle.
VOLUME 6
BOOK 60. PROPHETIC COMMENTARY ON THE QUR'AN (TAFSEER OF THE PROPHET (PBUH)) (1-501)
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 1:
Narrated Abu Said bin Al-Mu'alla:
While I was praying in the Mosque, Allah's Apostle called me but I did not
respond to him. Later I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I was praying." He said,
"Didn't Allah say'--"Give your response to Allah (by obeying Him) and to His
Apostle when he calls you." (8.24)
He then said to me, "I will teach you a Sura which is the greatest Sura in the
Qur'an, before you leave the Mosque." Then he got hold of my hand, and
when he intended to leave (the Mosque), I said to him, "Didn't you say to
me, 'I will teach you a Sura which is the greatest Sura in the Quran?' He said,
"Al-Hamdu-Lillah Rabbi-l-Alamin (i.e. Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the
worlds) which is Al-Sab'a Al-Mathani (i.e. seven repeatedly recited Verses)
and the Grand Qur'an which has been given to me."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 2:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "When the Imam says: 'Ghair-il-Maghdubi 'Alaihim
Walad-Dallin (i.e. not the path of those who earn Your Anger, nor the path
of those who went astray (1.7)), then you must say, 'Ameen', for if one's
utterance of 'Ameen' coincides with that of the angels, then his past sins will
be forgiven."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 3:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "On the Day of Resurrection the Believers will assemble
and say, 'Let us ask somebody to intercede for us with our Lord.' So they wil
go to Adam and say, 'You are the father of all the people, and Allah created
you with His Own Hands, and ordered the angels to prostrate to you, and
taught you the names of all things; so please intercede for us with your
Lord, so that He may relieve us from this place of ours.' Adam will say, 'I am
not fit for this (i.e. intercession for you).' Then Adam will remember his sin
and feel ashamed thereof. He will say, 'Go to Noah, for he was the first
Apostle, Allah sent to the inhabitants of the earth.' They will go to him and
Noah will say,
'I am not fit for this undertaking.' He will remember his appeal to his Lord to
do what he had no knowledge of, then he will feel ashamed thereof and will
say, 'Go to the Khalil--r-Rahman (i.e. Abraham).' They will go to him and he
will say, 'I am not fit for this undertaking. Go to Moses, the slave to whom
Allah spoke (directly) and gave him the Torah .' So they will go to him and he
will say, 'I am not fit for this undertaking.' and he will mention (his) killing a
person who was not a killer, and so he will feel ashamed thereof before his
Lord, and he will say, 'Go to Jesus, Allah's Slave, His Apostle and Allah's
Word and a Spirit coming from Him. Jesus will say, 'I am not fit for this
undertaking, go to Muhammad the Slave of Allah whose past and future sins
were forgiven by Allah.' So they will come to me and I will proceed till I will
ask my Lord's Permission and I will be given permission. When I see my Lord,
I will fall down in Prostration and He will let me remain in that state as long
as He wishes and then I will be addressed.' (Muhammad!) Raise your head.
Ask, and your request will be granted; say, and your saying will be listened
to; intercede, and your intercession will be accepted.' I will raise my head
and praise Allah with a saying (i.e. invocation) He will teach me, and then I
will intercede. He will fix a limit for me (to intercede for) whom I will admit
into Paradise. Then I will come back again to Allah, and when I see my Lord,
the same thing will happen to me. And then I will intercede and Allah will fix
a limit for me to intercede whom I will let into Paradise, then I will come
back for the third time; and then I will come back for the fourth time, and
will say, 'None remains in Hell but those whom the Quran has imprisoned (in
Hell) and who have been destined to an eternal stay in Hell.' " (The
compiler) Abu 'Abdullah said: 'But those whom the Qur'an has imprisoned in
Hell,' refers to the Statement of Allah:
"They will dwell therein forever." (16.29)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 4:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
I asked the Prophet, "What is the greatest sin in the Sight of Allah?" He said,
"That you set up a rival unto Allah though He Alone created you." I said,
"That is indeed a great sin." Then asked, "What is next?" He said, "To kill
your son lest he should share your food with you." I asked, "What is next?"
He said, "To commit illegal sexual intercourse with the wife of your
neighbor."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 5:
Narrated Said bin Zaid:
Allah's Apostle said, "The Kam'a (i.e. a kind of edible fungus) is like the
Manna (in that it is obtained without effort) and its water is a (medicine)
cure for eye trouble."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 6:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "It was said to the children of Israel, 'Enter the gate (of
the town), prostrate (in humility) and say: Hittatun (i.e. repentance) i.e. O
Allah!
Forgive our sins.' But they entered by dragging themselves on their
buttocks, so they did something different (from what they had been
ordered to do) and said, 'Hittatun,' but added, "A grain in a hair."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 7:
Narrated Anas:
'Abdullah bin Salam heard the news of the arrival of Allah's Apostle (at
Medina) while he was on a farm collecting its fruits. So he came to the
Prophet and said, "I will ask you about three things which nobody knows
unless he be a prophet. Firstly, what is the first portent of the Hour? What is
the first meal of the people of Paradise? And what makes a baby look like its
father or mother?'. The Prophet said, "Just now Gabriel has informed me
about that." 'Abdullah said, "Gabriel?" The Prophet said, "Yes." 'Abdullah
said, "He, among the angels is the enemy of the Jews." On that the Prophet
recited this Holy Verse:-"Whoever is an enemy to Gabriel (let him die in his fury!) for he has brought
it (i.e. Qur'an) down to your heart by Allah's permission." (2.97) Then he
added, "As for the first portent of the Hour, it will be a fire that will collect
the people from the East to West. And as for the first meal of the people of
Paradise, it will be the caudite (i.e. extra) lobe of the fish liver. And if a man's
discharge proceeded that of the woman, then the child resembles the
father, and if the woman's discharge proceeded that of the man, then the
child resembles the mother." On hearing that, 'Abdullah said, "I testify that
None has the right to be worshipped but Allah, and that you are the Apostle
of Allah, O, Allah's Apostle; the Jews are liars, and if they should come to
know that I have embraced Islam, they would accuse me of being a liar." In
the meantime some Jews came (to the Prophet) and he asked them, "What
is 'Abdullah's status amongst you?" They replied, "He is the best amongst
us, and he is our chief and the son of our chief." The Prophet said, "What
would you think if 'Abdullah bin Salam embraced Islam?" They replied, "May
Allah protect him from this!" Then 'Abdullah came out and said, "I testify
that None has the right to be worshipped but Allah and that Muhammad is
the Apostle of Allah." The Jews then said, "Abdullah is the worst of us and
the son of the worst of us," and disparaged him. On that 'Abdullah said, "O
Allah's Apostle! This is what I was afraid of!"

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 8:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Umar said, "Our best Qur'an reciter is Ubai and our best judge is 'Ali; and in
spite of this, we leave some of the statements of Ubai because Ubai says, 'I
do not leave anything that I have heard from Allah's Apostle while Allah:
"Whatever verse (Revelations) do We abrogate or cause to be forgotten but
We bring a better one or similar to it." (2.106)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 9:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet said, "Allah said, 'The son of Adam tells a lie against me though
he has no right to do so, and he abuses Me though he has no right to do so.
As for his telling a lie against Me, it is that he claims that I cannot recreate
him as I created him before; and as for his abusing Me, it is his statement
that I have offspring. No! Glorified be Me! I am far from taking a wife or
offspring.' "

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 10:
Narrated Anas:
Umar said, "I agreed with Allah in three things," or said, "My Lord agreed
with me in three things. I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Would that you took the
station of Abraham as a place of prayer.' I also said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Good
and bad persons visit you! Would that you ordered the Mothers of the
believers to cover themselves with veils.' So the Divine Verses of Al-Hijab
(i.e. veiling of the women) were revealed. I came to know that the Prophet
had blamed some of his wives so I entered upon them and said, 'You should
either stop (troubling the Prophet ) or else Allah will give His Apostle better
wives than you.' When I came to one of his wives, she said to me, 'O 'Umar!
Does Allah's Apostle haven't what he could advise his wives with, that you
try to advise them?' " Thereupon Allah revealed:-"It may be, if he divorced you (all) his Lord will give him instead of you,
wives better than you Muslims (who submit to Allah).." (66.5)
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 11:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(The wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle said, "Don't you see that when
your people built the Ka'ba, they did not build it on all Abraham's
foundations?" I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Why don't you rebuild it on
Abraham's foundations?" He said, "Were your people not so close to (the
period of Heathenism, i.e. the Period between their being Muslims and
being infidels), I would do so." The sub-narrator, 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said,
"Aisha had surely heard Allah's Apostle saying that, for I do not think that
Allah's Apostle left touching the two corners of the Ka'ba facing Al-Hijr
except because the Ka'ba was not built on all Abraham's foundations."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 12:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The people of the Scripture (Jews) used to recite the Torah in Hebrew and
they used to explain it in Arabic to the Muslims. On that Allah's Apostle said,
"Do not believe the people of the Scripture or disbelieve them, but say:-"We believe in Allah and what is revealed to us." (2.136)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 13:
Narrated Al-Bara:
The Prophet prayed facing Bait-ulMaqdis (i.e. Jerusalem) for sixteen or
seventeen months but he wished that his Qibla would be the Ka'ba (at
Mecca). (So Allah Revealed (2.144) and he offered 'Asr prayers(in his
Mosque facing Ka'ba at Mecca) and some people prayed with him. A man
from among those who had prayed with him, went out and passed by some
people offering prayer in another mosque, and they were in the state of
bowing. He said, "I, (swearing by Allah,) testify that I have prayed with the
Prophet facing Mecca." Hearing that, they turned their faces to the Ka'ba
while they were still bowing. Some men had died before the Qibla was
changed towards the Ka'ba. They had been killed and we did not know what
to say about them (i.e. whether their prayers towards Jerusalem were
accepted or not). So Allah revealed:-- "And Allah would never make your
faith (i.e. prayer) to be lost (i.e. your prayers offered (towards Jerusalem).
Truly Allah is Full of Pity, Most Merciful towards mankind." (2.143)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 14:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle said, "Noah will be called on the Day of Resurrection and he
will say, 'Labbaik and Sa'daik, O my Lord!' Allah will say, 'Did you convey the
Message?' Noah will say, 'Yes.' His nation will then be asked, 'Did he convey
the Message to you?' They will say, 'No Warner came to us.' Then Allah will
say (to Noah), 'Who will bear witness in your favor?' He will say,
'Muhammad and his followers. So they (i.e. Muslims) will testify that he
conveyed the Message. And the Apostle (Muhammad) will be a witness over
yourselves, and that is what is meant by the Statement of Allah "Thus We
have made of you a just and the best nation that you may be witnesses over
mankind and the Apostle (Muhammad) will be a witness over yourselves."
(2.143)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 15:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
While some people were offering Fajr prayer in the Quba' mosque, someone came and said, "Allah has revealed to the Prophet Qur'anic instructions
that you should face the Ka'ba (while praying) so you too, should face it."
Those people then turned towards the Ka'ba.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 16:
Narrated Anas:
None remains of those who prayed facing both Qiblas (that is, Jerusalem
and Mecca) except myself.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 17:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
While some people were offering morning prayer at Quba' a man came to
them and said, "A Quranic Order has been revealed to Allah's Apostle
tonight that he should face the Ka'ba at Mecca (in prayer), so you too
should turn your faces towards it." At that moment their faces were
towards Sham (i.e. Jerusalem) (and on hearing that) they turned towards
the Ka'ba (at Mecca).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 18:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
While some people were offering Fajr prayer at Quba' (mosque), some-one
came to them and said, "Tonight some Qur'anic Verses have been revealed
to the Prophet and he has been ordered to face the Ka'ba (at Mecca)
(during prayers), so you too should turn your faces towards it." At that time
their faces were towards Sham (Jerusalem) so they turned towards the
Ka'ba (at Mecca).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 19:
Narrated Al-Bara:
We prayed along with the Prophet facing Jerusalem for sixteen or
seventeen months. Then Allah ordered him to turn his face towards the
Qibla (in Mecca):--
"And from whence-so-ever you start forth (for prayers) turn your face in the
direction of (the Sacred Mosque of Mecca) Al-Masjid-ul Haram.." (2.149)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 20:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
While some people were at Quba (offering) morning prayer, a man came to
them and said, "Last night Quranic Verses have been revealed whereby the
Prophet has been ordered to face the Ka'ba (at Mecca), so you too should
face it." So they, keeping their postures, turned towards the Ka'ba. Formerly
the people were facing Sham (Jerusalem) (Allah said):-"And from whence-so-ever you start forth (for prayers), turn your face in the
direction of the Sacred Mosque of Mecca (Al-Masjid-ul-Haram), and whenceso-ever you are, turn your face towards it (when you pray)" (2.150)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 21:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
While some people were offering Fajr prayer at Quba mosque, someone
came to them and said, "Quranic literature" has been revealed to Allah's
Apostle tonight, and he has been ordered to face the Ka'ba (of Mecca) so
you too, should turn your faces towards it. Their faces were then towards
Sham (Jerusalem), so they turned towards the Qibla (i.e. Ka'ba of Mecca)."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 22:
Narrated Urwa:
I said to 'Aisha, the wife of the Prophet, and I was at that time a young boy,
"How do you interpret the Statement of Allah:
"Verily, Safa and Marwa (i.e. two mountains at Mecca) are among the
Symbols of Allah."
So it is not harmful of those who perform the Hajj to the House of Allah) or
perform the Umra, to ambulate (Tawaf) between them. In my opinion it is
not sinful for one not to ambulate (Tawaf) between them." 'Aisha said,
"Your interpretation is wrong for as you say, the Verse should have been:
"So it is not harmful of those who perform the Hajj or Umra to the House,
not to ambulate (Tawaf) between them.' This Verse was revealed in
connection with the Ansar who (during the Pre-Islamic Period) used to visit
Manat (i.e. an idol) after assuming their Ihram, and it was situated near
Qudaid (i.e. a place at Mecca), and they used to regard it sinful to ambulate
between Safa and Marwa after embracing Islam. When Islam came, they
asked Allah's Apostle about it, whereupon Allah revealed:-"Verily, Safa and Marwa (i.e. two mountains at Mecca) are among the
Symbols of Allah. So it is not harmful of those who perform the Hajj of the
House (of Allah) or perform the Umra, to ambulate (Tawaf) between them."
(2.158)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 23:
Narrated 'Asim bin Sulaiman:
I asked Anas bin Malik about Safa and Marwa. Anas replied, "We used to
consider (i.e. going around) them a custom of the Pre-islamic period of
Ignorance, so when Islam came, we gave up going around them. Then Allah
revealed" "Verily, Safa and Marwa (i.e. two mountains at Mecca) are among
the Symbols of Allah. So it is not harmful of those who perform the Hajj of
the House (of Allah) or perform the Umra to ambulate (Tawaf) between
them." (2.158)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 24:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said one statement and I said another. The Prophet said
"Whoever dies while still invoking anything other than Allah as a rival to
Allah, will enter Hell (Fire)." And I said, "Whoever dies without invoking
anything as a rival to Allah, will enter Paradise."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 25:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The law of Qisas (i.e. equality in punishment) was prescribed for the children
of Israel, but the Diya (i.e. blood money was not ordained for them). So
Allah said to this Nation (i.e. Muslims):
"O you who believe! The law of Al-Qisas (i.e. equality in punishment) is
prescribed for you in cases of murder: The free for the free, the slave for the
slave, and the female for the female. But if the relatives (or one of them) of
the killed (person) forgive their brother (i.e. the killers something of Qisas
(i.e. not to kill the killer by accepting blood money in the case of intentional
murder)----then the relatives (of the killed person) should demand bloodmoney in a reasonable manner and the killer must pay with handsome
gratitude. This is an allevitation and a Mercy from your Lord, (in comparison
to what was prescribed for the nations before you).
So after this, whoever transgresses the limits (i.e. to kill the killer after
taking the blood-money) shall have a painful torment." (2.178)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 26:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "The prescribed Law of Allah is the equality in punishment
(i.e. Al-Qisas)." (In cases of murders, etc.)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 27:
Narrated Anas:
That his aunt, Ar-Rubai' broke an incisor tooth of a girl. My aunt's family
requested the girl's relatives for forgiveness but they refused; then they
proposed a compensation, but they refused. Then they went to Allah's
Apostle and refused everything except Al-Qisas (i.e. equality in punishment).
So Allah's Apostle passed the judgment of Al-Qisas (i.e. equality of
punishment). Anas bin Al-Nadr said, "O Allah's Apostle! Will the incisor tooth
of Ar-Rubai be broken? No, by Him Who sent you with the Truth, her incisor
tooth will not be broken." Allah's Apostle said, "O Anas! The prescribed law
of Allah is equality in punishment (i.e. Al-Qisas.)" Thereupon those people
became satisfied and forgave her. Then Allah's Apostle said, "Among Allah's
Worshippers there are some who, if they took Allah's Oath (for something),
Allah fulfill their oaths."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 28:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Fasting was observed on the day of 'Ashura' (i.e. 10th of Muharram) by the
people of the Pre-lslamic Period. But when (the order of compulsory fasting)
in the month of Ramadan was revealed, the Prophet said, "It is up to one to
fast on it (i.e. day of 'Ashura') or not."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 29:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The people used to fast on the day of 'Ashura' before fasting in Ramadan
was prescribed but when (the order of compulsory fasting in) Ramadan was
revealed, it was up to one to fast on it (i.e. 'Ashura') or not.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 30:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
That Al-Ash'ath entered upon him while he was eating. Al-Ash'ath said,
"Today is 'Ashura." I said (to him), "Fasting had been observed (on such a
day) before (the order of compulsory fasting in) Ramadan was revealed. But
when (the order of fasting in) Ramadan was revealed, fasting (on 'Ashura')
was given up, so come and eat."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 31:
Narrated Aisha:
During the Pre-lslamic Period of ignorance the Quraish used to observe
fasting on the day of 'Ashura', and the Prophet himself used to observe
fasting on it too. But when he came to Medina, he fasted on that day and
ordered the Muslims to fast on it. When (the order of compulsory fasting in )
Ramadan was revealed, fasting in Ramadan became an obligation, and
fasting on 'Ashura' was given up, and who ever wished to fast (on it) did so,
and whoever did not wish to fast on it, did not fast.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 32:
Narrated 'Ata:
That he heard Ibn 'Abbas reciting the Divine Verse:-"And for those who can fast they had a choice either fast, or feed a poor for
every day.." (2.184) Ibn 'Abbas said, "This Verse is not abrogated, but it is
meant for old men and old women who have no strength to fast, so they
should feed one poor person for each day of fasting (instead of fasting)."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 33:
Narrated Nafi:
Ibn 'Umar recited:
"They had a choice, either fast or feed a poor for every day.." and added,
"This Verse is abrogated."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 34:
Narrated Salama:
When the Divine Revelation:
"For those who can fast, they had a choice either fast, or feed a poor for
every day," (2.184) was revealed, it was permissible for one to give a ransom
and give up fasting, till the Verse succeeding it was revealed and abrogated
it.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 35:
Narrated Al-Bara:
When the order of compulsory fasting of Ramadan was revealed, the people
did not have sexual relations with their wives for the whole month of
Ramadan, but some men cheated themselves (by violating that restriction).
So Allah revealed:-- "Allah is aware that you were deceiving yourselves but
He accepted your repentance and for gave you.." (3.187)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 36:
Narrated Ash-Sha'bi:
'Adi took a white rope (or thread) and a black one, and when some part of
the night had passed, he looked at them but he could not distinguish one
from the other. The next morning he said, "O Allah's Apostle! I put (a white
thread and a black thread) underneath my pillow." The Prophet said, "Then
your pillow is too wide if the white thread (of dawn) and the black thread
(of the night) are underneath your pillow! "
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 37:
Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim:
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! What is the meaning of the white thread distinct
from the black thread? Are these two threads?" He said, "You are not
intelligent if you watch the two threads." He then added, "No, it is the
darkness of the night and the whiteness of the day.''

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 38:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad: The Verse:-"And eat and drink until the white thread appears to you distinct from the
black thread." was revealed, but: '... of dawn' was not revealed (along with
it) so some men, when intending to fast, used to tie their legs, one with
white thread and the other with black thread and would keep on eating till
they could distinguish one thread from the other. Then Allah revealed' ... of
dawn,' whereupon they understood that meant the night and the day.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 39:
Narrated Al-Bara:
In the Pre-lslamic Period when the people assumed Ihram, they would enter
their houses from the back. So Allah revealed:-"And it is not righteousness that you enter houses from the back, but the
righteous man is he who fears Allah, obeys His Orders and keeps away from
what He has forbidden. So enter houses through their doors." (2.189)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 40:
Narrated Nafi':
During the affliction of Ibn Az-Zubair, two men came to Ibn 'Umar and said,
"The people are lost, and you are the son of 'Umar, and the companion o
the Prophet, so what forbids you from coming out?" He said, "What forbids
me is that Allah has prohibited the shedding of my brother's blood." They
both said, "Didn't Allah say, 'And fight then until there is no more affliction?"
He said "We fought until there was no more affliction and the worship is for
Allah (Alone while you want to fight until there is affliction and until the
worship become for other than Allah."
Narrated Nafi (through another group of sub-narrators): A man came to Ibn
'Umar and said, "O Abu Abdur Rahman! What made you perform Hajj in one
year and Umra in another year and leave the Jihad for Allah' Cause though
you know how much Allah recommends it?" Ibn 'Umar replied, "O son of my
brother! Islam is founded on five principles, i.e. believe in Allah and His
Apostle, the five compulsory prayers, the fasting of the month of Ramadan,
the payment of Zakat, and the Hajj to the House (of Allah)." The man said,
"O Abu Abdur Rahman! Won't you listen to why Allah has mentioned in His
Book: 'If two groups of believers fight each other, then make peace
between them, but if one of then transgresses beyond bounds against the
other, then you all fight against the one that transgresses. (49.9) and:--"And
fight them till there is no more affliction (i.e. no more worshiping of others
along with Allah)." Ibn 'Umar said, "We did it, during the lifetime of Allah's
Apostle when Islam had only a few followers. A man would be put to trial
because of his religion; he would either be killed or tortured. But when the
Muslims increased, there was no more afflictions or oppressions." The man
said, "What is your opinion about 'Uthman and 'Ali?" Ibn 'Umar said, "As for
'Uthman, it seems that Allah has forgiven him, but you people dislike that he
should be forgiven. And as for 'Ali, he is the cousin of Allah's Apostle and his
son-in-law." Then he pointed with his hand and said, "That is his house which
you see."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 41:
Narrated Abu Wail:
Hudhaifa said, "The Verse:--
"And spend (of your wealth) in the Cause of Allah and do not throw
yourselves in destruction," (2.195) was revealed concerning spending in
Allah's Cause (i.e. Jihad)."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 42:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Maqal:
I sat with Ka'b bin Ujra in this mosque, i.e. Kufa Mosque, and asked him
about the meaning of:--"Pay a ransom (i.e. Fidya) of either fasting or - - - (2.196) He said, "I was taken to the Prophet while lice were falling on my
face. The Prophet said, 'I did not think that your trouble reached to such an
extent. Can you afford to slaughter a sheep (as a ransom for shaving your
head)?' I said, 'No.' He said, 'Then fast for three days, or feed six poor
persons by giving half a Sa of food for each and shave your head.' So the
above Verse was revealed especially for me and generally for all of you."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 43:
Narrated 'Imran bin Husain:
The Verse of Hajj-at-Tamatu was revealed in Allah's Book, so we performed
it with Allah's Apostle, and nothing was revealed in Qur'an to make it illegal,
nor did the Prophet prohibit it till he died. But the man (who regarded it
illegal) just expressed what his own mind suggested.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 44:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
'Ukaz, Mijanna and Dhul-Majaz were markets during the Pre-islamic Period.
They (i.e. Muslims) considered it a sin to trade there during the Hajj time (i.e.
season), so this Verse was revealed:-- "There is no harm for you if you seek
of the Bounty of your Lord during the Hajj season." (2.198)
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 45:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Quraish people and those who embraced their religion, used to stay at
Muzdalifa and used to call themselves Al-Hums, while the rest of the Arabs
used to stay at 'Arafat. When Islam came, Allah ordered His Prophet to go to
'Arafat and stay at it, and then pass on from there, and that is what is meant
by the Statement of Allah:--"Then depart from the place whence all the
people depart......" (2.199)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 46:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
A man who wants to perform the Hajj (from Mecca) can perform the Tawaf
around the Ka'ba as long as he is not in the state of Ihram till he assumes the
Ihram for Hajj. Then, if he rides and proceeds to 'Arafat, he should take a
Hadi (i.e. animal for sacrifice), either a camel or a cow or a sheep, whatever
he can afford; but if he cannot afford it, he should fast for three days during
the Hajj before the day of 'Arafat, but if the third day of his fasting happens
to be the day of 'Arafat (i.e. 9th of Dhul-Hijja) then it is no sin for him (to fast
on it). Then he should proceed to 'Arafat and stay there from the time of the
'Asr prayer till darkness falls. Then the pilgrims should proceed from 'Arafat,
and when they have departed from it, they reach Jam' (i.e. Al-Muzdalifa)
where they ask Allah to help them to be righteous and dutiful to Him, and
there they remember Allah greatly or say Takbir (i.e. Allah is Greater) and
Tahlil (i.e. None has the right to be worshipped but Allah) repeatedly before
dawn breaks. Then, after offering the morning (Fajr) prayer you should pass
on (to Mina) for the people used to do so and Allah said:-"Then depart from the place whence all the people depart. And ask for
Allah's Forgiveness. Truly! Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful." (2.199)
Then you should go on doing so till you throw pebbles over the Jamra.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 47:
Narrated Anas :
The Prophet used to say, "O Allah! Our Lord! Give us in this world that, which
is good and in the Hereafter that, which is good and save us from the
torment of the Fire." (2.201)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 48:
Narrated 'Aisha :
The Prophet said, "The most hated man in the Sight of Allah is the one who
is the most quarrelsome." Narrated 'Aisha: The Prophet said, "Or do you
think that you shall enter Paradise without such (trials) as came to those
who passed away before you?" (2.214)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 49:
Narrated Ibn Abu Mulaika:
Ibn 'Abbas recited: "(Respite will be granted) until when the Apostles gave
up hope (of their people) and thought that they were denied (by their
people). There came to them Our Help ...." (12.110) reading Kudhibu without
doubling the sound 'dh', and that was what he understood of the Verse.
Then he went on reciting: "..even the Apostle and those who believed along
with him said: When (will come) Allah's Help? Yes, verily, Allah's Help is
near." (2.214)
Then I met 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair and I mentioned that to him. He said, "Aisha
said, 'Allah forbid! By Allah, Allah never promised His Apostle anything but
he knew that it would certainly happen before he died. But trials were
continuously presented before the Apostles till they were afraid that their
followers would accuse them of telling lies. So I used to recite:-"Till they (come to) think that they were treated as liars." reading 'Kudhdhibu with double 'dh.'
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 50:
Narrated Nafi':
Whenever Ibn 'Umar recited the Qur'an, he would not speak to anyone till
he had finished his recitation. Once I held the Qur'an and he recited Surat-alBaqara from his memory and then stopped at a certain Verse and said, "Do
you know in what connection this Verse was revealed? " I replied, "No." He
said, "It was revealed in such-and-such connection." Ibn 'Umar then
resumed his recitation. Nafi added regarding the Verse:--"So go to your tilth
when or how you will" Ibn 'Umar said, "It means one should approach his
wife in .."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 51:
Narrated Jabir:
Jews used to say: "If one has sexual intercourse with his wife from the back,
then she will deliver a squint-eyed child." So this Verse was revealed:-"Your wives are a tilth unto you; so go to your tilth when or how you will."
(2.223)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 52:
Narrated Al-Hasan:
The sister of Ma'qal bin Yasar was divorced by her husband who left her till
she had fulfilled her term of 'Iddat (i.e. the period which should elapse
before she can Remarry) and then he wanted to remarry her but Maqal
refused, so this Verse was revealed:-"Do not prevent them from marrying their (former) husbands." (2.232)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 53:
Narrated Ibn Az-Zubair
I said to 'Uthman bin 'Affan (while he was collecting the Qur'an) regarding
the Verse:-- "Those of you who die and leave wives ..." (2.240) "This Verse
was abrogated by an other Verse. So why should you write it? (Or leave it in
the Qur'an)?" 'Uthman said. "O son of my brother! I will not shift anything of
it from its place."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 54:
Narrated Mujahi:
(regarding the Verse):-- "Those of you who die and leave wives behind. They
- (their wives) -- shall wait (as regards their marriage ) for four months and
ten days)." (2.234)
The widow, according to this Verse, was to spend this period of waiting with
her husband's family, so Allah revealed: "Those of you who die and leave
wives (i.e. widows) should bequeath for their wives, a year's maintenance
and residences without turning them out, but if they leave (their residence),
there is no blame on you for what they do with themselves provided it is
honorable.' (i.e. lawful marriage) (2.240).
So Allah entitled the widow to be bequeathed extra maintenance for seven
months and twenty nights, and that is the completion of one year. If she
wished she could stay (in her husband's home) according to the will, and she
could leave it if she wished, as Allah says:
"..without turning them out, but if they leave (the residence), there is no
blame on you." So the 'Idda (i.e. four months and ten days as it) is obligatory
for her.
'Ata said: Ibn 'Abbas said, "This Verse, i.e. the Statement of Allah: "..without
turning them out.." cancelled the obligation of staying for the waiting
period in her dead husband's house, and she can complete this period
wherever she likes." 'Ata's aid: If she wished, she could complete her 'Idda
by staying in her dead husband's residence according to the will or leave it
according to Allah's Statement:--
"There is no blame on you for what they do with themselves." 'Ata' added:
Later the regulations of inheritance came and abrogated the order of the
dwelling of the widow (in her dead husband's house), so she could
complete the 'Idda wherever she likes. And it was no longer necessary to
provide her with a residence. Ibn 'Abbas said, "This Verse abrogated her (i.e.
widow's) dwelling in her dead husband's house and she could complete the
'Idda (i.e. four months and ten days) wherever she liked, as Allah's
Statement says:--"...without turning them out..."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 55:
Narrated Muhammad bin Sirin:
I sat in a gathering in which the chiefs of the Ansar were present, and AbdurRahman bin Abu Laila was amongst them. I mentioned the narration of
'Abdullah bin 'Utba regarding the question of Subai'a bint Al-Harith. AbdurRahman said, "But 'Abdullah's uncle used not to say so." I said, "I am too
brave if I tell a lie concerning a person who is now in Al-Kufa," and I raised
my voice. Then I went out and met Malik bin 'Amir or Malik bin 'Auf, and
said, "What was the verdict of Ibn Mas'ud about the pregnant widow whose
husband had died?" He replied, "Ibn Mas'ud said, 'Why do you impose on
her the hard order and don't let her make use of the leave? The shorter Sura
of women (i.e. Surat-at-Talaq) was revealed after the longer Sura (i.e. Suratal-Baqara)." (i.e. Her 'Idda is up till she delivers.)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 56:
Narrated 'Ali:
The Prophet said (as below Hadith 57)).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 57:
Narrated 'Ali: on the day of Al-Khandaq (the battle of the Trench). the
Prophet said
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 58:
Narrated Zaid bin Arqam:
We used to speak while in prayer. One of us used to speak to his brother
(while in prayer) about his need, till the Verse was revealed:-"Guard strictly the (five obligatory) prayers, especially the middle (the Best)
(Asr) Prayer and stand before Allah with obedience (and not to speak to
others during the prayers)." Then we were ordered not to speak in the
prayers.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 59:
Narrated Nafi':
Whenever 'Abdullah bin 'Umar was asked about Salat-al-Khauf (i.e. prayer of
fear) he said, "The Imam comes forward with a group of people and leads
them in a one Rak'a prayer while another group from them who has not
prayed yet, stay between the praying group and the enemy. When those
who are with the Imam have finished their one Rak'a, they retreat and take
the positions of those who have not prayed but they will not finish their
prayers with Taslim. Those who have not prayed, come forward to offer a
Rak'a with the Imam (while the first group covers them from the enemy).
Then the Imam, having offered two Rakat, finishes his prayer. Then each
member of the two groups offer the second Rak'a alone after the Imam has
finished his prayer. Thus each one of the two groups will have offered two
Rakat. But if the fear is too great, they can pray standing on their feet or
riding on their mounts, facing the Qibla or not." Nafi added: I do not think
that 'Abdullah bin 'Umar narrated this except from Allah's Apostle (See
Hadith No. 451, Vol 5 to know exactly "The Fear Prayer.")

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 60:
Narrated Ibn Az-Zubair:
I said to 'Uthman, "This Verse which is in Surat-al-Baqara:
"Those of you who die and leave widows behind...without turning them
out." has been abrogated by another Verse. Why then do you write it (in the
Qur'an)?" 'Uthman said. "Leave it (where it is), O the son of my brother, for I
will not shift anything of it (i.e. the Quran) from its original position."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 61:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "We have more right to be in doubt than Abraham
when he said, 'My Lord! Show me how You give life to the dead.' He said,
'Do you not believe?' He said, 'Yes (I believe) but to be stronger in Faith.'
"(2.260)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 62:
Narrated Ubaid bin Umair: Once 'Umar (bin Al-Khattab) said to the
companions of the Prophet "What do you think about this Verse:--"Does any
of you wish that he should have a garden?" They replied, "Allah knows
best." 'Umar became angry and said, "Either say that you know or say that
you do not know!" On that Ibn Abbas said, "O chief of the believers! I have
something in my mind to say about it." Umar said, "O son of my brother!
Say, and do not under estimate yourself." Ibn Abbas said, "This Verse has
been set up as an example for deeds." Umar said, "What kind of deeds?" Ibn
Abbas said, "For deeds." Umar said, "This is an example for a rich man who
does goods out of obedience of Allah and then Allah sends him Satan
whereupon he commits sins till all his good deeds are lost."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 63:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The poor person is not the one for whom a date or two
or a morsel or two (of food is sufficient but the poor person is he who does
not (beg or) ask the people (for something) or show his poverty at all.
Recite if you wish, (Allah's Statement):
"They do not beg of people at all." (2.273)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 64:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When the Verses of Surat-al-Baqara regarding usury (i.e. Riba) were
revealed, Allah's Apostle recited them before the people and then he
prohibited the trade of alcoholic liquors.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 65:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When the last Verses of Surat-al-Baqara were revealed. Allah's Apostle went
out and recited them in the Mosque and prohibited the trade of alcoholic
liquors.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 66:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When the last Verses of Surat-al-Baqara were revealed, the Prophet read
them in the Mosque and prohibited the trade of alcoholic liquors. "If the
debtor is in difficulty, grant him time till it is easy for him to repay.." (2.280)
Narrated 'Aisha: When the last Verses of Surat-al-Baqara were revealed,
Allah's Apostle stood up and recited them before us and then prohibited the
trade of alcoholic liquors.
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 67:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The last Verse (in the Quran) revealed to the Prophet was the Verse dealing
with usury (i.e. Riba).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 68:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
This Verse:--"Whether you show what is in your minds or conceal it.." (2.284)
was abrogated.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 69:
Narrated Marwan Al-Asghar:
A man from the companions of Allah's Apostle who I think, was Ibn 'Umar
said, "The Verse:--"Whether you show what is in your minds or conceal it...."
was abrogated by the Verse following it."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 70:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle recited the Verse:-"It is He who has sent down to you the Book. In it are Verses that are
entirely clear, they are the foundation of the Book, others not entirely clear.
So as for those in whose hearts there is a deviation (from the Truth ). follow
thereof that is not entirely clear seeking affliction and searching for its
hidden meanings; but no one knows its hidden meanings but Allah. And
those who are firmly grounded in knowledge say: "We believe in it (i.e. in
the Qur'an) the whole of it (i.e. its clear and unclear Verses) are from our
Lord. And none receive admonition except men of understanding." (3.7)
Then Allah's Apostle said, "If you see those who follow thereof that is not
entirely clear, then they are those whom Allah has named [as having
deviation (from the Truth)] 'So beware of them."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 71:
Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab:
Abu Huraira said, "The Prophet said, 'No child is born but that, Satan
touches it when it is born where upon it starts crying loudly because of
being touched by Satan, except Mary and her Son." Abu Huraira then said,
"Recite, it you wish: "And I seek Refuge with You (Allah) for her and her
offspring from Satan, the outcast." (3.36)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 72:
Narrated Abu Wail:
'Abdullah bin Masud said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'Whoever takes an oath
when asked to do so, in which he may deprive a Muslim of his property
unlawfully, will meet Allah Who will be angry with him.' So Allah revealed in
confirmation of this statement:--"Verily! Those who Purchase a small gain at
the cost of Allah's Covenant and oaths, they shall have no portion in the
Hereafter..." (3.77) Then entered Al-Ash'ath bin Qais and said, "What is Abu
'Abdur-Rahman narrating to you?" We replied, 'So-and-so." Al-Ash'ath said,
"This Verse was revealed in my connection. I had a well in the land of my
cousin (and he denied my, possessing it). On that the Prophet said to me,
'Either you bring forward a proof or he (i.e. your cousin) takes an oath (to
confirm his claim)' I said, 'I am sure he would take a (false) oath, O Allah's
Apostle.' He said, 'If somebody takes an oath when asked to do so through
which he may deprive a Muslim of his property (unlawfully) and he is a liar in
his oath, he will meet Allah Who will be angry with him.' "

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 73:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Aufa:
A man displayed some merchandise in the market and took an oath that he
had been offered a certain price for it while in fact he had not, in order to
cheat a man from the Muslims. So then was revealed:--"Verily! Those who
purchase a small gain at the cost of Allah's Covenant and their oaths..."(3.77)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 74:
Narrated Ibn Abu Mulaika:
Two women were stitching shoes in a house or a room. Then one of them
came out with an awl driven into her hand, and she sued the other for it. The
case was brought before Ibn 'Abbas, Ibn 'Abbas said, "Allah's Apostle said,
'If people were to be given what they claim (without proving their claim) the
life and property of the nation would be lost.' Will you remind her (i.e. the
defendant), of Allah and recite before her:--"Verily! Those who purchase a
small gain at the cost of Allah's Covenant and their oaths..."(3.77)
So they reminded her and she confessed. Ibn 'Abbas then said, "The Prophet
said, 'The oath is to be taken by the defendant (in the absence of any proof
against him)."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 75:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Abu Sufyan narrated to me personally, saying, "I set out during the Truce
that had been concluded between me and Allah's Apostle. While I was in
Sham, a letter sent by the Prophet was brought to Heraclius. Dihya Al-Kalbi
had brought and given it to the governor of Busra, and the latter forwarded
it to Heraclius. Heraclius said, 'Is there anyone from the people of this man
who claims to be a prophet?' The people replied, 'Yes.' So I along with some
of Quraishi men were called and we entered upon Heraclius, and we were
seated in front of him. Then he said, 'Who amongst you is the nearest
relative to the man who claims to be a prophet?' So they made me sit in
front of him and made my companions sit behind me. Then he called upon
his translator and said (to him). 'Tell them ( i.e. Abu Sufyan's companions)
that I am going to ask him (i.e. Abu Sufyan) regarding that man who claims
to be a prophet. So, if he tell me a lie, they should contradict him (instantly).'
By Allah, had I not been afraid that my companions would consider me a liar,
I would have told lies. Heraclius then said to his translator, 'Ask him: What is
his (i.e. the Prophet's) family status amongst you? I said, 'He belongs to a
noble family amongst us." Heraclius said, 'Was any of his ancestors a king?' I
said, 'No.' He said, 'Did you ever accuse him of telling lies before his saying
what he has said?' I said, 'No.' He said, 'Do the nobles follow him or the poor
people?' I said, 'It is the poor who followed him.' He said, 'Is the number of
his follower increasing or decreasing?' I said, 'The are increasing.' He said,
'Does anyone renounce his religion (i.e. Islam) after embracing it, being
displeased with it?' I said, 'No.' He said, 'Did you fight with him?' I replied,
'Yes.' He said, 'How was your fighting with him?' I said, 'The fighting
between us was undecided and victory was shared by him and us by turns.
He inflicts casualties upon us and we inflict casualties upon him.' He said,
'Did he ever betray?' I said, 'No, but now we are away from him in this truce
and we do not know what he will do in it" Abu Sufyan added, "By Allah, I
was not able to insert in my speech a word (against him) except that.
Heraclius said, 'Did anybody else (amongst you) ever claimed the same (i.e.
Islam) before him? I said, 'No.' Then Heraclius told his translator to tell me
(i.e. Abu Sufyan), 'I asked you about his family status amongst you, and you
told me that he comes from a noble family amongst you Verily, all Apostles
come from the noblest family among their people. Then I asked you
whether any of his ancestors was a king, and you denied that. Thereupon I
thought that had one of his fore-fathers been a king, I would have said that
he (i.e. Muhammad) was seeking to rule the kingdom of his fore-fathers.
Then I asked you regarding his followers, whether they were the noble or
the poor among the people, and you said that they were only the poor (who
follow him). In fact, such are the followers of the Apostles. Then I asked you
whether you have ever accused him of telling lies before saying what he
said, and your reply was in the negative. Therefore, I took for granted that a
man who did not tell a lie about others, could ever tell a lie about Allah. Then
I asked you whether anyone of his followers had renounced his religion (i.e.
Islam) after embracing it, being displeased with it, and you denied that. And
such is Faith when it mixes with the cheerfulness of the hearts. Then I asked
you whether his followers were increasing or decreasing You claimed that
they were increasing. That is the way of true faith till it is complete. Then I
asked you whether you had ever fought with him, and you claimed that you
had fought with him and the battle between you and him was undecided
and the victory was shared by you and him in turns; he inflicted casual ties
upon you and you inflicted casualties upon them. Such is the case with the
Apostles; they are out to test and the final victory is for them. Then I asked
you whether he had ever betrayed; you claimed that he had never betrayed.
I need, Apostles never betray. Then I asked you whether anyone had said
this statement before him; and you denied that. Thereupon I thought if
somebody had said that statement before him, then I would have said that
he was but a man copying some sayings said before him." Abu Safyan said,
"Heraclius then asked me, 'What does he order you to do?' I said, 'He orders
us (to offer) prayers and (to pay) Zakat and to keep good relationship with
the Kith and kin and to be chaste.' Then Heraclius said, 'If whatever you have
said, is true, he is really a prophet, and I knew that he ( i.e. the Prophet ) was
going to appear, but I never thought that he would be from amongst you. If
I were certain that I can reach him, I would like to meet him and if I were
with him, I would wash his feet; and his kingdom will expand (surely to what
is under my feet.' Then Heraclius asked for the letter of Allah's Apostle and
read it wherein was written:
"In the Name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful. This letter is)
from Muhammad, Apostle of Allah, to Heraclius, the sovereign of
Byzantine........ Peace be upon him who follows the Right Path. Now then, I
call you to embrace Islam. Embrace Islam and you will be saved (from Allah's
Punishment); embrace Islam, and Allah will give you a double reward, but if
you reject this, you will be responsible for the sins of all the people of your
kingdom (Allah's Statement):--"O the people of the Scripture (Jews and
Christians)! Come to a word common to you and us that we worship None
but Allah....bear witness that we are Muslims.' (3.64)
When he finished reading the letter, voices grew louder near him and there
was a great hue and cry, and we were ordered to go out." Abu Sufyan
added, "While coming out, I said to my companions, 'The situation of Ibn
Abu Kabsha (i.e. Muhammad) has become strong; even the king of Banu AlAsfar is afraid of him.' So I continued to believe that Allah's Apostle would
be victorious, till Allah made me embrace Islam." Az-Zuhri said, "Heraclius
then invited all the chiefs of the Byzantines and had them assembled in his
house and said, 'O group of Byzantines! Do you wish to have a permanent
success and guidance and that your kingdom should remain with you?'
(Immediately after hearing that), they rushed towards the gate like onagers,
but they found them closed. Heraclius then said, 'Bring them back to me.' So
he called them and said, 'I just wanted to test the strength of your
adherence to your religion. Now I have observed of you that which I like.'
Then the people fell in prostration before him and became pleased with
him." (See Hadith No. 6,Vol 1)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 76:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Out of all the Ansar, living in Medina, Abu Talha had the largest number of
(date palm trees) gardens, and the most beloved of his property to him was
Bairuha garden which was standing opposite the Mosque (of the Prophet).
Allah's Apostle used to enter it and drink of its good water. When the Verse:-"By no means shall you attain righteousness unless you spend (in charity) of
that which you love." (3.92) Abu Talha got up and said, "O Allah's Apostle,
Allah says:--"By no means shall you attain righteousness unless you spend (in
charity) of that which you love." (3.92) and the most beloved of my property
to me is the Bairuha garden, so I give it (as a charitable gift) in Allah's Cause
and hope to receive good out of it, and to have it stored for me with Allah.
So, O Allah's Apostle! Dispose it of (i.e. utilize it) in the way Allah orders you
(to dispose it of)." Allah's Apostle said, "Bravo! That is a fruitful property!
That is a fruitful property! I have heard what you have said and I think that
you should distribute that (garden) amongst your relatives." The Abu Talha
distributed that garden amongst his relatives and his cousins.
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 77:
Narrated Yahya bin Yahya:
I learnt from Malik, "..a fruitful property."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 78:
Narrated Anas:
Abu Talha distributed the garden between Hassan and Ubai, but he did not
give me anything thereof although I was a nearer relative to him.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 79:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:
The Jews brought to the Prophet a man and a woman from among them
who had committed illegal sexual intercourse. The Prophet said to them,
"How do you usually punish the one amongst you who has committed illegal
sexual intercourse?" They replied, "We blacken their faces with coal and
beat them," He said, "Don't you find the order of Ar-Rajm (i.e. stoning to
death) in the Torah?" They replied, "We do not find anything in it." 'Abdullah
bin Salam (after hearing this conversation) said to them. "You have told a
lie! Bring here the Torah and recite it if you are truthful." (So the Jews
brought the Torah). And the religious teacher who was teaching it to them,
put his hand over the Verse of Ar-Rajm and started reading what was
written above and below the place hidden with his hand, but he did not read
the Verse of Ar-Rajm. 'Abdullah bin Salam removed his (i.e. the teacher's)
hand from the Verse of Ar-Rajm and said, "What is this?" So when the Jews
saw that Verse, they said, "This is the Verse of Ar-Rajm." So the Prophet
ordered the two adulterers to be stoned to death, and they were stoned to
death near the place where biers used to be placed near the Mosque. I saw
her companion (i.e. the adulterer) bowing over her so as to protect her from
the stones.
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 80:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Verse:--"You (true Muslims) are the best of peoples ever raised up for
mankind." means, the best of peoples for the people, as you bring them
with chains on their necks till they embrace Islam.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 81:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Verse:--"When two parties from among you were about to lose heart,
but Allah was their Protector," (3.122) was revealed concerning us, and we
were the two parties, i.e. Banu Haritha and Banu Salama, and we do not
wish (that it had not been revealed) or I would not have been pleased (if it
had not been revealed), for Allah says:--"...Allah was their Protector."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 82:
Narrated Salim's father:
That he heard Allah's Apostle on raising his head from the bowing in the last
Rak'a in the Fajr prayer, saying, "O Allah, curse such-and-such person and
such-and-such person, and such-and-such person," after saying, "Allah hears
him who sends his praises to Him, O our Lord, all praise is for you." So Allah
revealed:--"Not for you (O Muhammad) (but for Allah) is the decision, verily
they are indeed wrongdoers." (3.128)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 83:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Whenever Allah's Apostle intended to invoke evil upon somebody or invoke
good upon somebody, he used to invoke (Allah after bowing (in the prayer).
Sometimes after saying, "Allah hears him who sends his praises to Him, all
praise is for You, O our Lord," he would say, "O Allah. Save Al-Walid bin AlWalid and Salama bin Hisham, and 'Aiyash bin Abu Rabi'a. O Allah! Inflict
Your Severe Torture on Mudar (tribe) and strike them with (famine) years
like the years of Joseph." The Prophet used to say in a loud voice, and he
also used to say in some of his Fajr prayers, "O Allah! Curse so-and-so and soand-so." naming some of the Arab tribes till Allah revealed:--"Not for you (O
Muhammad) (but for Allah) is the decision." (3.128)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 84:
Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib:
The Prophet appointed 'Abdullah bin Jubair as the commander of the
infantry during the battle of Uhud. They returned defeated, and that is what
is meant by:-"And the Apostle was calling them back in the rear. None remained with the
Prophet then, but twelve men."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 85:
Narrated Abu Talha:
Slumber overtook us during the battle of Uhud while we were in the front
files. My sword would fall from my hand and I would pick it up, and again it
would fall down and I would pick it up again.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 86:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
'Allah is Sufficient for us and He Is the Best Disposer of affairs," was said by
Abraham when he was thrown into the fire; and it was said by Muhammad
when they (i.e. hypocrites) said, "A great army is gathering against you,
therefore, fear them," but it only increased their faith and they said: "Allah is
Sufficient for us, and He is the Best Disposer (of affairs, for us)." (3.173)
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 87:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The last statement of Abraham when he was thrown into the fire was:-"Allah is Sufficient for us and He is the Best Disposer (of affairs for us)."
(3.173)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 88:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Anyone whom Allah has given wealth but he does not
pay its Zakat, then, on the Day of Resurrection, his wealth will be presented
to him in the shape of a bald-headed poisonous male snake with two
poisonous glands in its mouth and it will encircle itself round his neck and
bite him over his cheeks and say, "I am your wealth; I am your treasure."
Then the Prophet recited this Divine Verse:-"And let not those who covetously withhold of that which Allah has
bestowed upon them of His Bounty." (3.180)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 89:
Narrated Usama bin Zaid:
Allah's Apostle rode a donkey, equipped with a thick cloth-covering made in
Fadak and was riding behind him. He was going to pay visit to Sad bin Ubada
in Banu Al-Harith bin Al-Khazraj; and this incident happened before the
battle of Badr. The Prophet passed by a gathering in which 'Abdullah bin
Ubai bin Salul was present, and that was before 'Abdullah bin Ubai
embraced Islam. Behold in that gathering there were people of different
religions: there were Muslims, pagans, idol-worshippers and Jews, and in
that gathering 'Abdullah bin Rawaha was also present. When a cloud of dust
raised by the donkey reached that gathering, 'Abdullah bin Ubai covered his
nose with his garment and then said, "Do not cover us with dust." Then
Allah's Apostle greeted them and stopped and dismounted and invited them
to Allah (i.e. to embrace Islam) and recited to them the Holy Qur'an. On that,
'Abdullah bin Ubai bin Saluil said, "O man ! There is nothing better than that
what you say. If it is the truth, then do not trouble us with it in our
gatherings. Return to your mount (or residence) and if somebody comes to
you, relate (your tales) to him." On that 'Abdullah bin Rawaha said, "Yes, O
Allah's Apostle! Bring it (i.e. what you want to say) to us in our gathering, for
we love that."
So the Muslims, the pagans and the Jews started abusing one another till
they were on the point of fighting with one another. The Prophet kept on
quietening them till they became quiet, whereupon the Prophet rode his
animal (mount) and proceeded till he entered upon Sad bin Ubada. The
Prophet said to Sad, "Did you not hear what 'Abu Hub-b said?" He meant
'Abdullah bin Ubai. "He said so-and-so." On that Sad bin Ubada said, "O
Allah's Apostle! Excuse and forgive him, for by Him Who revealed the Book
to you, Allah brought the Truth which was sent to you at the time when the
people of this town (i.e. Medina) had decided unanimously to crown him
and tie a turban on his head (electing him as chief). But when Allah opposed
that (decision) through the Truth which Allah gave to you, he (i.e. 'Abdullah
bin Ubai) was grieved with jealously. and that caused him to do what you
have seen." So Allah's Apostle excused him, for the Prophet and his
companions used to forgive the pagans and the people of Scripture as Allah
had ordered them, and they used to put up with their mischief with
patience. Allah said: "And you shall certainly hear much that will grieve you
from those who received the Scripture before you and from the
pagans........'(3.186) And Allah also said:--"Many of the people of the
Scripture wish if they could turn you away as disbelievers after you have
believed, from selfish envy.." (2.109)
So the Prophet used to stick to the principle of forgiveness for them as long
as Allah ordered him to do so till Allah permitted fighting them. So when
Allah's Apostle fought the battle of Badr and Allah killed the nobles of
Quraish infidels through him, Ibn Ubai bin Salul and the pagans and idolaters
who were with him, said, "This matter (i.e. Islam) has appeared (i.e. became
victorious)." So they gave the pledge of allegiance (for embracing Islam) to
Allah's Apostle and became Muslims.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 90:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
During the lifetime of Allah's Apostle, some men among the hypocrites used
to remain behind him (i.e. did not accompany him) when he went out for a
Ghazwa and they would be pleased to stay at home behind Allah's Apostle
When Allah's Apostle returned (from the battle) they would put forward
(false) excuses and take oaths, wishing to be praised for what they had not
done. So there was revealed:-"Think not that those who rejoice in what they have done, and love to be
praised for what they have not done.." (3.188)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 91:
Narrated Alqama bin Waqqas:
Marwan said to his gatekeeper, "Go to Ibn 'Abbas, O Rafi, and say, 'If
everybody who rejoices in what he has done, and likes to be praised for
what he has not done, will be punished, then all of us will be punished." Ibn
Abbas said, "What connection have you with this case? It was only that the
Prophet called the Jews and asked them about something, and they hid the
truth and told him something else, and showed him that they deserved
praise for the favor of telling him the answer to his question, and they
became happy with what they had concealed.
Then Ibn Abbas recited:-"(And remember) when Allah took a Covenant from those who were given
the Scripture..and those who rejoice in what they have done and love to be
praised for what they have not done.' " (3.187-188)
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 92:
Narrated Humaid bin 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf:
That Marwan had told him (the above narration No. 91).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 93:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
I stayed overnight in the house of my aunt Maimuna. Allah's Apostle talked
with his wife for a while and then went to bed. When it was the last third of
the night, he got up and looked towards the sky and said:
"Verily! In the creation of the Heavens and the Earth and in the alteration of
night and day, there are indeed signs for men of understanding." (3.190)
Then he stood up, performed ablution, brushed his teeth with a Siwak, and
then prayed eleven Rakat. Then Bilal pronounced the Adhan (i.e. call for the
Fajr prayer). The Prophet then offered two Rakat (Sunna) prayer and went
out (to the Mosque) and offered the (compulsory congregational) Fajr
prayer.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 94:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
(One night) I stayed overnight in the house of my aunt Maimuna, and said to
myself, "I will watch the prayer of Allah's Apostle " My aunt placed a cushion
for Allah's Apostle and he slept on it in its length-wise direction and (wokeup) rubbing the traces of sleep off his face and then he recited the last ten
Verses of Surat-al-Imran till he finished it. Then he went to a hanging water
skin and took it, performed the ablution and then stood up to offer the
prayer. I got up and did the same as he had done, and stood beside him. He
put his hand on my head and held me by the ear and twisted it. He offered
two Rakat, then two Rakat, then two Rakat, then two Rakat, then two
Rakat, then two Rakat, and finally the Witr (i.e. one Rak'a) prayer.
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 95:
Narrated Abdullah bin Abbas:
That once he stayed overnight (in the house) of his aunt Maimuna. the wife
of the Prophet. He added: I lay on the cushion transversely and Allah's
Apostle lay along with his wife in the lengthwise direction of the pillow.
Allah's Apostle slept till the middle of the night, either a bit before or a bit
after it, and then woke up rubbing the traces of sleep off his face with his
hands and then he recited the last ten Verses of Surat-al-Imran, got up and
went to a hanging water skin. He then performed the ablution from it, and it
was perfect ablution, and then stood up to offer the prayer. I too did the
same as he had done, and then went to stand beside him. Allah's Apostle
put his right hand on my head and held and twisted my right ear. He then
offered two Rakat, then two Rakat, then two Rakat, then two Rakat, then
two Rakat. then two Rakat, and finally one Rak'a, the Witr. Then he lay
down again till the Muadhdhin (i.e. the call-maker) came to him, whereupon
he got up and offered a light two-Rakat prayer, and went out (to the
Mosque) and offered the (compulsory congregational) Fajr prayer.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 96:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
That once he stayed overnight in the house of his aunt, the wife of the
Prophet. He added: I lay on the cushion transversely while Allah's Apostle lay
along with his wife in the lengthwise direction of cushion. Allah's Apostle
slept till the middle of the night, either a bit before or a bit after it, and then
woke up rubbing the traces of sleep off his face with his hands, and then
recited the last ten Verses of Suratal-Imran. Then he got up and went to a
hanging water skin, performed ablution from it ---- and performed it
perfectly. Then he stood up to perform the prayer. I also did the same 3S he
had done and then went to stand beside him. Allah's Apostle put his right
hand on my head and held and twisted my right ear. He then offered two
Rakat, then two Rakat then two Rakat, then two then two Rakat, then two
Rakat, and finally, one Rak'a Witr. Then lay down again till the Muadhdhin
(i.e. the call-maker) came to him, whereupon he got up and offered a light
two Rakat prayer and went out (to the Mosque) and offered the
(compulsory congregational) Fajr prayer.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 97:
Narrated Aisha:
There was an orphan (girl) under the care of a man. He married her and she
owned a date palm (garden). He married her just because of that and not
because he loved her. So the Divine Verse came regarding his case: "If you
fear that you shall not be able to deal justly with the orphan girls..." (4.3)
The sub-narrator added: I think he (i.e. another sub-narrator) said, "That
orphan girl was his partner in that datepalm (garden) and in his property."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 98:
Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair:
That he asked 'Aisha regarding the Statement of Allah:
"If you fear that you shall not be able to deal justly with the orphan girls..."
(4.3) She said, "O son of my sister! An Orphan girl used to be under the care
of a guardian with whom she shared property. Her guardian, being attracted
by her wealth and beauty, would intend to marry her without giving her a
just Mahr, i.e. the same Mahr as any other person might give her (in case he
married her). So such guardians were forbidden to do that unless they did
justice to their female wards and gave them the highest Mahr their peers
might get. They were ordered (by Allah, to marry women of their choice
other than those orphan girls." 'Aisha added," The people asked Allah's
Apostle his instructions after the revelation of this Divine Verse whereupon
Allah revealed:
"They ask your instruction regarding women " (4.127) 'Aisha further said,
"And the Statement of Allah: "And yet whom you desire to marry." (4.127) as
anyone of you refrains from marrying an orphan girl (under his
guardianship) when she is lacking in property and beauty." 'Aisha added,
"So they were forbidden to marry those orphan girls for whose wealth and
beauty they had a desire unless with justice, and that was because they
would refrain from marrying them if they were lacking in property and
beauty."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 99:
Narrated Aisha:
regarding the Statement of Allah: "And whoever amongst the guardian is
rich, he should take no wages, but if he is poor, let him have for himself
what is just and reasonable (according to his work). This Verse was revealed
regarding the orphan's property. If the guardian is poor, he can take from
the property of the orphan, what is just and reasonable according to his
work and the time he spends on managing it.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 100:
Narrated Ikrama:
Ibn Abbas said ( regarding the verse), "And when the relatives and the
orphans and the poor are present at the time of division, "this verse and its
order is valid and not abrogated."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 101:
Narrated Jabir:
The Prophet and Abu Bakr came on foot to pay me a visit (during my illness)
at Banu Salama's (dwellings). The Prophet found me unconscious, so he
asked for water and performed the ablution from it and sprinkled some
water over it. I came to my senses and said, "O Allah's Apostle! What do you
order me to do as regards my wealth?" So there was revealed:--
"Allah commands you as regards your children's (inheritance):" (4.11)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 102:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
(In the Pre-Islamic Period ) the children used to inherit all the property but
the parents used to inherit only through a will. So Allah cancelled that which
He liked to cancel and put decreed that the share of a son was to be twice
the share of a daughter, and for the parents one-sixth for each one of them,
or one third, and for the wife one-eighth or one-fourth, and for the husband
one-half, or one-fourth.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 103:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
regarding the Divine Verse: "O you who believe! You are forbidden to inherit
women against their will, and you should not treat them with harshness that
you may take back part of the (Mahr) dower you have given them." (4.19)
(Before this revelation) if a man died, his relatives used to have the right to
inherit his wife, and one of them could marry her if he would, or they would
give her in marriage if they wished, or, if they wished, they would not give
her in marriage at all, and they would be more entitled to dispose her, than
her own relatives. So the above Verse was revealed in this connection.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 104:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Regarding the Verse: "To everyone, We have appointed heirs." (4.33)
'Mawali' means heirs. And regarding:-- "And those to whom your right hands
have pledged."
When the Emigrants came to Medina, an Emigrant used to be the heir of an
Ansari with the exclusion of the latter's relatives, and that was because of
the bond of brotherhood which the Prophet had established between them
(i.e. the Emigrants and the Ansar). So when the Verses:-- "To everyone We
have appointed heirs." was revealed, (the inheritance through bond of
brotherhood) was cancelled. Ibn Abbas then said: "And those to whom your
right hands have pledged." is concerned with the covenant of helping and
advising each other. So allies are no longer to be the heir of each other, but
they can bequeath each other some of their property by means of a will.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 105:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
During the lifetime of the Prophet some people said, : O Allah's Apostle!
Shall we see our Lord on the Day of Resurrection?" The Prophet said, "Yes;
do you have any difficulty in seeing the sun at midday when it is bright and
there is no cloud in the sky?" They replied, "No." He said, "Do you have any
difficulty in seeing the moon on a full moon night when it is bright and there
is no cloud in the sky?" They replied, "No." The Prophet said, "(Similarly) you
will have no difficulty in seeing Allah on the Day of Resurrection as you have
no difficulty in seeing either of them. On the Day of Resurrection, a callmaker will announce, "Let every nation follow that which they used to
worship." Then none of those who used to worship anything other than
Allah like idols and other deities but will fall in Hell (Fire), till there will
remain none but those who used to worship Allah, both those who were
obedient (i.e. good) and those who were disobedient (i.e. bad) and the
remaining party of the people of the Scripture. Then the Jews will be called
upon and it will be said to them, 'Who do you use to worship?' They will say,
'We used to worship Ezra, the son of Allah.' It will be said to them, 'You are
liars, for Allah has never taken anyone as a wife or a son. What do you want
now?' They will say, 'O our Lord! We are thirsty, so give us something to
drink.' They will be directed and addressed thus, 'Will you drink,' whereupon
they will be gathered unto Hell (Fire) which will look like a mirage whose
different sides will be destroying each other. Then they will fall into the Fire.
Afterwards the Christians will be called upon and it will be said to them,
'Who do you use to worship?' They will say, 'We used to worship Jesus, the
son of Allah.' It will be said to them, 'You are liars, for Allah has never taken
anyone as a wife or a son,' Then it will be said to them, 'What do you want?'
They will say what the former people have said. Then, when there remain (in
the gathering) none but those who used to worship Allah (Alone, the real
Lord of the Worlds) whether they were obedient or disobedient. Then
(Allah) the Lord of the worlds will come to them in a shape nearest to the
picture they had in their minds about Him. It will be said, 'What are you
waiting for?' Every nation have followed what they used to worship.' They
will reply, 'We left the people in the world when we were in great need of
them and we did not take them as friends. Now we are waiting for our Lord
Whom we used to worship.' Allah will say, 'I am your Lord.' They will say
twice or thrice, 'We do not worship any besides Allah.' "

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 106:
Narrated Abdullah bin Masud:
Allah's Apostle said to me, "Recite (of the Qur'an) for me," I said, "Shall I
recite it to you although it had been revealed to you?" He said, "I like to hear
(the Qur'an) from others." So I recited Surat-an-Nisa' till I reached: "How
(will it be) then when We bring from each nation a witness, and We bring
you (O Muhammad) as a witness against these people?" (4.41) Then he said,
"Stop!" And behold, his eyes were overflowing with tears."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 107:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The necklace of Asma' was lost, so the Prophet sent some men to look for it.
The time for the prayer became due and they had not performed ablution
and could not find water, so they offered the prayer without ablution. Then
Allah revealed (the Verse of Tayammum).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 108:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Verse: "Obey Allah and Obey the Apostle and those of you (Muslims)
who are in authority." (4.59) was revealed in connection with 'Abdullah bin
Hudhafa bin Qais bin 'Adi' when the Prophet appointed him as the
commander of a Sariyya (army detachment).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 109:
Narrated 'Urwa:
Az-Zubair quarrelled with a man from the Ansar because of a natural
mountainous stream at Al-Harra. The Prophet said "O Zubair! Irrigate (your
lands and the let the water flow to your neighbor The Ansar said, "O Allah's
Apostle (This is because) he (Zubair) is your cousin?" At that, the Prophet's
face became red (with anger) and he said "O Zubair! Irrigate (your land) and
then withhold the water till it fills the land up to the walls and then let it flow
to your neighbor." So the Prophet enabled Az-Zubair to take his full right
after the Ansari provoked his anger. The Prophet had previously given a
order that was in favor of both of them Az-Zubair said, "I don't think but the
Verse was revealed in this connection: "But no, by your Lord, they can have
no faith, until they make you judge in all disputes between them." (4.6)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 110:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "No prophet gets sick but he is given the
choice to select either this world or the Hereafter." 'Aisha added: During his
fatal illness, his voice became very husky and I heard him saying: "In the
company of those whom is the Grace of Allah, of the prophets, the Siddiqin
(those followers of the prophets who were first and foremost to believe in
them), the martyrs and the pious.' (4.69) And from this I came to know that
he has been given the option.
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 111:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
My mother and I were among the weak and oppressed (Muslims at Mecca).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 112:
Narrated Ibn Abi Mulaika:
Ibn Abbas recited:-- "Except the weak ones among men women and
children," (4.98) and said, "My mother and I were among those whom Allah
had excused."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 113:
Narrated Zaid bin Thabit: Regarding the Verse:-- "Then what is the matter
with you that you are divided into two parties about the hypocrites?" (4.88)
Some of the companions of the Prophet returned from the battle of Uhud
(i.e. refused to

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 114:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
The people of Kufa disagreed (disputed) about the above Verse. So I went
to Ibn Abbas and asked him about it. He said, "This Verse:-- "And whoever
kills a believer intentionally, his recompense is Hell." was revealed last of all
(concerning premeditated murder) and nothing abrogated it."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 115:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Regarding the Verse: "And say not to anyone who offers you peace (by
accepting Islam), You are not a believer." There was a man amidst his sheep.
The Muslims pursued him, and he said (to them) "Peace be on you." But
they killed him and took over his sheep. Thereupon Allah revealed in that
concern, the above Verse up to:-- "...seeking the perishable good of this
life." (4.94) i.e. those sheep.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 116:
Narrated Zaid bin Thabit: That the Prophet dictated to him: "Not equal are
those of the believers who sit (at home) and those who strive and fight in
the Cause of Allah."
Zaid added: Ibn Um Maktum came while the Prophet was dictating to me
and said, "O Allah's Apostle! By Allah, if I had the power to fight (in Allah's
Cause), I would," and he was a blind man. So Allah revealed to his Apostle
while his thigh was on my thigh, and his thigh became so heavy that I was
afraid it might fracture my thigh. Then that state of the Prophet passed and
Allah revealed:-- "Except those who are disabled (by injury or are blind or
lame etc)."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 117:
Narrated Al-Bara:
When the Verse:-- "Not equal are those of the believers who sit (at home)"
(4.95) was revealed, Allah Apostle called for Zaid who wrote it. In the
meantime Ibn Um Maktum came and complained of his blindness, so Allah
revealed: "Except those who are disabled (by injury or are blind or lame..."
etc.) (4.95)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 118:
Narrated Al-Bara:
When the Verse:--"Not equal are those of the believers who sit (at home),"
(4.95) was revealed, the Prophet said, "Call so-and-so." That person came to
him with an ink-pot and a wooden board or a shoulder scapula bone. The
Prophet said (to him), "Write: 'Not equal are those believers who sit (at
home) and those who strive and fight in the Cause of Allah." Ibn Um
Maktum who was sitting behind the Prophet then said, "O Allah's Apostle! I
am a blind man." So there was revealed in the place of that Verse, the
Verse:--"Not equal are those of the believers who sit (at home) except those
who are disabled (by injury, or are blind or lame etc.) and those who strive
and fight in the Cause of Allah." (4.95)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 119:
Narrated Ibn Abbas: Not equal are those believers who sat (at home) and
did not join the

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 120:
Narrated Muhammad bin Abdur-Rahman Abu Al-Aswad:
The people of Medina were forced to prepare an army (to fight against the
people of Sham during the caliphate of 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair at Mecca),
and I was enlisted in it; Then I met 'Ikrima, the freed slave of Ibn 'Abbas, and
informed him (about it), and he forbade me strongly to do so (i.e. to enlist in
that army), and then said, "Ibn 'Abbas informed me that some Muslim
people were with the pagans, increasing the number of the pagans against
Allah's Apostle. An arrow used to be shot which would hit one of them (the
Muslims in the company of the pagans) and kill him, or he would be struck
and killed (with a sword)." Then Allah revealed:-"Verily! as for those whom the angels take (in death) while they are
wronging themselves (by staying among the disbelievers)" (4.97) Abu
Aswad added, "Except the weak ones among men, women,..." (4.98)
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 121:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
'"Except the weak ones" (4.98) and added: My mother was one of those
whom Allah excused.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 122:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
While the Prophet was offering the 'Isha' prayer, he said, "Allah hears him
who sends his praises to Him," and then said before falling in prostration, "O
Allah, save 'Aiyash bin Rabi'a. O Allah, save Salama bin Hisham. O Allah, save
Al-Walid bin Al-Wahd. O Allah, save the weak ones among the believers. O
Allah, let Your punishment be severe on the tribe of Mudar. O Allah, inflict
upon them years (of famine) like the years of Joseph."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 123:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Regarding the Verse: "Because of the inconvenience of rain or because you
are ill." (4.102) (It was revealed in connection with) 'Abdur-Rahman bin Auf
who was wounded.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 124:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Regarding the Verse:--"They ask your instruction concerning the women.
Say: Allah instructs you about them and yet whom you desire to marry."
(4.127) (has been revealed regarding the case of) a man who has an orphan
girl, and he is her guardian and her heir. The girl shares with him all his
property, even a date-palm (garden), but he dislikes to marry her and
dislikes to give her in marriage to somebody else who would share with him
the property she is sharing with him, and for this reason that guardian
prevents that orphan girl from marrying. So, this Verse was revealed: (And
Allah's statement:) "If a woman fears cruelty or desertion on her husband's
part." (4.128)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 125:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Regarding the Verse:--"If a woman fears cruelty or desertion on her
husband's part." (4.128) It is about a man who has a woman (wife) and he
does not like her and wants to divorce her but she says to him, "I make you
free as regards myself." So this Verse was revealed in this connection.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 126:
Narrated Al-Aswad:
While we were sitting in a circle in 'Abdullah's gathering, Hudhaifa came and
stopped before us, and greeted us and then said, "People better than you
became hypocrites." Al-Aswad said: I testify the uniqueness of Allah! Allah
says: "Verily! The hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the Fire." (4.145)
On that 'Abdullah smiled and Hudhaifa sat somewhere in the Mosque.
'Abdullah then got up and his companions (sitting around him) dispersed.
Hudhaifa then threw a pebble at me (to attract my attention). I went to him
and he said, "I was surprised at 'Abdullah's smile though he understood
what I said. Verily, people better than you became hypocrite and then
repented and Allah forgave them."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 127:
Narrated Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "None has the right to say that I am better than Jonah bin
Matta."
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 128:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Whoever says that I am better than Jonah bin Matta, is a
liar."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 129:
Narrated Al-Bara:
The last Sura that was revealed was Bara'a, and the last Verse that was
revealed was: "They ask you for a legal verdict, Say: Allah's directs (thus)
about those who leave no descendants or ascendants as heirs." (4.176)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 130:
Narrated Tariq bin Shihab:
The Jews said to 'Umar, "You (i.e. Muslims) recite a Verse, and had it been
revealed to us, we would have taken the day of its revelation as a day of
celebration." 'Umar said, "I know very well when and where it was revealed,
and where Allah's Apostle was when it was revealed. (It was revealed on)
the day of Arafat (Hajj Day), and by Allah, I was at Arafat" Sufyan, a subnarrator said: I am in doubt whether the Verse:-- "This day I have perfected
your religion for you." was revealed on a Friday or not.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 131:
Narrated Aisha:
The wife of the Prophet : We set out with Allah's Apostle on one of his
journeys, and when we were at Baida' or at Dhat-al-Jaish, a necklace of mine
was broken (and lost). Allah's Apostle stayed there to look for it, and so did
the people along with him. Neither were they at a place of water, nor di
they have any water with them. So the people went to Abu Bakr As-Siddiq
and said, "Don't you see what 'Aisha has done? She has made Allah's Apostle
and the people, stay where there is no water and they have no water with
them." Abu Bakr came while Allah's Apostle was sleeping with his head on
my thigh. He said (to me), "You have detained Allah's Apostle and the
people where there is no water, and they have no water with them." So he
admonished me and said what Allah wished him to say, and he hit me on my
flanks with his hand. Nothing prevented me from moving (because of pain!
but the position of Allah's Apostle on my thigh. So Allah's Apostle got up
when dawn broke and there was no water, so Allah revealed the Verse of
Tayammum. Usaid bin Hudair said, "It is not the first blessing of yours, O the
family of Abu Bakr." Then we made the camel on which I was riding, got up,
and found the necklace under it.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 132:
Narrated Aisha:
A necklace of mine was lost at Al-Baida' and we were on our way to Medina.
The Prophet made his camel kneel down and dismounted and laid his head
on my lap and slept. Abu Bakr came to me and hit me violently on the chest
and said, "You have detained the people because of a necklace." I kept as
motionless as a dead person because of the position of Allah's Apostle ; (on
my lap) although Abu Bakr had hurt me (with the slap). Then the Prophet
woke up and it was the time for the morning (prayer). Water was sought,
but in vain; so the following Verse was revealed:-"O you who believe! When you intend to offer prayer.." (5.6) Usaid bin
Hudair said, "Allah has blessed the people for your sake, O the family of Abu
Bakr. You are but a blessing for them."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 133:
Narrated Abdullah (bin Masud):
On the day of Badr, Al-Miqdad said, "O Allah's Apostle! We do not say to you
as the children of Israel said to Moses, 'Go you and your Lord and fight you
two; we are sitting here, (5.24) but (we say). "Proceed, and we are with
you." That seemed to delight Allah's Apostle greatly.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 134:
Narrated Abu Qilaba:
That he was sitting behind Umar bin Abdul Aziz and the people mentioned
and mentioned (about At-Qasama) and they said (various things), and said
that the Caliphs had permitted it. 'Umar bin 'Abdul 'Aziz turned towards Abu
Qilaba who was behind him and said. "What do you say, O 'Abdullah bin
Zaid?" or said, "What do you say, O Abu Qilaba?" Abu Qilaba said, "I do not
know that killing a person is lawful in Islam except in three cases: a married
person committing illegal sexual intercourse, one who has murdered
somebody unlawfully, or one who wages war against Allah and His Apostle."
'Anbasa said, "Anas narrated to us such-and-such." Abu Qilaba said, "Anas
narrated to me in this concern, saying, some people came to the Prophet
and they spoke to him saying, 'The climate of this land does not suit us.' The
Prophet said, 'These are camels belonging to us, and they are to be taken
out to the pasture. So take them out and drink of their milk and urine.' So
they took them and set out and drank of their urine and milk, and having
recovered, they attacked the shepherd, killed him and drove away the
camels.' Why should there be any delay in punishing them as they murdered
(a person) and waged war against Allah and His Apostle and frightened
Allah's Apostle ?" Anbasa said, "I testify the uniqueness of Allah!" Abu Qilaba
said, "Do you suspect me?" 'Anbasa said, "No, Anas narrated that (Hadith)
to us." Then 'Anbasa added, "O the people of such-and-such (country), you
will remain in good state as long as Allah keeps this (man) and the like of this
(man) amongst you."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 135:
Narrated Anas (bin Malik):
Ar-Rubai (the paternal aunt of Anas bin Malik) broke the incisor tooth of
young Ansari girl. Her family demanded the Qisas and they came to the
Prophet who passed the judgment of Qisas. Anas bin An-Nadr (the paternal
uncle of Anas bin Malik) said, "O Allah's Apostle! By Allah, her tooth will not
be broken." The Prophet said, "O Anas! (The law prescribed in) Allah's Book
is Qisas." But the people (i.e. the relatives of the girl) gave up their claim and
accepted a compensation. On that Allah's Apostle said, "Some of Allah's
worshippers are such that if they take an oath, Allah will fulfill it for them."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 136:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Whoever tells that Muhammad concealed part of what was revealed to him,
is a liar, for Allah says:-"O Apostle (Muhammad)! Proclaim (the Message) which has been sent
down to you from your Lord." (5.67)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 137:
Narrated 'Aisha:
This Verse: "Allah will not punish you for what is unintentional in your
oaths." (5.89) was revealed about a man's state men (during his talk), "No,
by Allah," and "Yes, by Allah."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 138:
Narrated Aisha:
That her father (Abu Bakr) never broke his oath till Allah revealed the order
of the legal expiation for oath. Abu Bakr said, "If I ever take an oath (to do
something) and later find that to do something else is better, then I accept
Allah's permission and do that which is better, (and do the legal expiation
for my oath ) ".
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 139:
Narrated Abdullah:
We used to participate in the holy wars carried on by the Prophet and we
had no women (wives) with us. So we said (to the Prophet ). "Shall we
castrate ourselves?" But the Prophet forbade us to do that and thenceforth
he allowed us to marry a woman (temporarily) by giving her even a garment,
and then he recited: "O you who believe! Do not make unlawful the good
things which Allah has made lawful for you."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 140:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
(The Verse of) prohibiting alcoholic drinks was revealed when there were in
Medina five kinds of (alcoholic) drinks none of which was produced from
grapes.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 141:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
We had no alcoholic drink except that which was produced from dates and
which you call Fadikh. While I was standing offering drinks to Abu Talh and
so-and-so and so-and-so, a man cam and said, "Has the news reached you?
They said, "What is that?" He said. "Alcoholic drinks have been prohibited.
They said, "Spill (the contents of these pots, O Anas! "Then they neither
asked about it (alcoholic drinks) nor returned it after the news from that
man.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 142:
Narrated Jabir:
Some people drank alcoholic beverages in the morning (of the day) of the
Uhud battle and on the same day they were killed as martyrs, and that was
before wine was prohibited.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 143:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
I heard 'Umar while he was on the pulpit of the Prophet saying, "Now then
O people! The revelation about the prohibition of alcoholic drinks was
revealed; and alcoholic drinks are extracted from five things: Grapes, dates,
honey, wheat and barley. And the alcoholic drink is that which confuses and
stupefies the mind."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 144:
Narrated Anas:
The alcoholic drink which was spilled was Al-Fadikh. I used to offer alcoholic
drinks to the people at the residence of Abu Talha. Then the order of
prohibiting Alcoholic drinks was revealed, and the Prophet ordered
somebody to announce that: Abu Talha said to me, "Go out and see what
this voice (this announcement ) is." I went out and (on coming back) said,
"This is somebody announcing that alcoholic beverages have been
prohibited." Abu Talha said to me, "Go and spill it (i.e. the wine)," Then it
(alcoholic drinks) was seen flowing through the streets of Medina. At that
time the wine was Al-Fadikh. The people said, "Some people (Muslims) were
killed (during the battle of Uhud) while wine was in their stomachs." So
Allah revealed: "On those who believe and do good deeds there is no blame
for what they ate (in the past)." (5.93)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 145:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet delivered a sermon the like of which I had never heard before.
He said, "If you but knew what I know then you would have laughed little
and wept much." On hearing that, the companions of the Prophet covered
their faces and the sound of their weeping was heard. A man said, "Who is
my father?" The Prophet said, "So-and-so." So this Verse was revealed: "Ask
not about things which, if made plain to you, may cause you trouble." (5.101)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 146:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Some people were asking Allah's Apostle questions mockingly. A man would
say, "Who is my father?" Another man whose she-camel had gone astray
would say, "Where is my she-camel? "So Allah revealed this Verse in this
connection: "O you who believe! Ask not about things which, if made plain
to you, may cause you trouble." (5.101)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 147:
Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab:
Bahira is a she-camel whose milk is kept for the idols and nobody is allowed
to milk it; Sa'iba was the she-camel which they used to set free for their
gods and nothing was allowed to be carried on it. Abu Huraira said: Allah's
Apostle said, "I saw 'Amr bin 'Amir Al-Khuzai (in a dream) dragging his
intestines in the Fire, and he was the first person to establish the tradition of
setting free the animals (for the sake of their deities)," Wasila is the shecamel which gives birth to a she-camel as its first delivery, and then gives
birth to another she-camel as its second delivery. People (in the Pre-lslamic
periods of ignorance) used to let that she camel loose for their idols if it
gave birth to two she-camels successively without giving birth to a male
camel in between. 'Ham' was the male camel which was used for copulation.
When it had finished the number of copulations assigned for it, they would
let it loose for their idols and excuse it from burdens so that nothing would
be carried on it, and they called it the 'Hami.' Abu Huraira said, "I heard the
Prophet saying so."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 148:
Narrated Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said, "I saw Hell and its different portions were consuming
each other and saw 'Amr dragging his intestines (in it), and he was the first
person to establish the tradition of letting animals loose (for the idols)."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 149:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Allah's Apostle delivered a sermon and said, "O people! You will be gathered
before Allah bare-footed, naked and not circumcised." Then (quoting Quran)
he said:-"As We began the first creation, We shall repeat it. A promise We have
undertaken: Truly we shall do it.." (21.104)
The Prophet then said, "The first of the human beings to be dressed on the
Day of Resurrection, will be Abraham. Lo! Some men from my followers will
be brought and then (the angels) will drive them to the left side (Hell-Fire). I
will say. 'O my Lord! (They are) my companions!' Then a reply will come
(from Almighty), 'You do not know what they did after you.' I will say as the
pious slave (the Prophet Jesus) said: And I was a witness over them while I
dwelt amongst them. When You took me up. You were the Watcher over
them and You are a Witness to all things.' (5.117) Then it will be said, "These
people have continued to be apostates since you left them."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 150:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet said, "You will be gathered (on the Day of Resurrection) and
some people will be driven (by the angels) to the left side (and taken to Hell)
whereupon I will say as the pious slave (Jesus) said:-- "And I was a witness
over them while I dwelt amongst them...the ALMIGHTY, the All Wise." (5.117118)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 151:
Narrated Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "The key of the Unseen are five: Verily with Allah
(Alone) is the knowledge of the Hour He sends down the rain and knows
what is in the wombs. No soul knows what it will earn tomorrow, and no
soul knows in what land it will die. Verily, Allah is All-Knower, All-Aware."
(31.34)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 152:
Narrated Jabir:
When this Verse was revealed: "Say: He has power to send torment on you
from above." (6.65) Allah's Apostle said, "O Allah! I seek refuge with Your
Face (from this punishment)." And when the verse: "or send torment from
below your feet," (was revealed), Allah's Apostle said, "(O Allah!) I seek
refuge with Your Face (from this punishment)." (But when there was
revealed): "Or confuse you in party strife and make you to taste the violence
of one another." (6.65) Allah's Apostle said, "This is lighter (or, this is
easier)."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 153:
Narrated Abdullah:
When:"...and confuse not their belief with wrong." (6.82) was revealed, the
Prophet's companions said, "Which of us has not done wrong?" Then there
was revealed:-- "Verily joining others in worship with Allah is a tremendous
wrong indeed." (31.13)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 154:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet said, "Nobody has the rights to say that I am better than Jonah
bin Matta."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 155:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Nobody has the right to say that I am better than Jonah
bin Matta."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 156:
Narrated Mujahid:
That he asked Ibn 'Abbas, "Is there a prostration Surat-al-Sad?" (38.24) Ibn
Abbas said, "Yes," and then recited: "We gave...So follow their guidance."
(6.85,90) Then he said, "He (David ) is one them (i.e. those prophets)."
Mujahid narrated: I asked Ibn 'Abbas (regarding the above Verse). He said,
"Your Prophet (Muhammad) was one of those who were ordered to follow
them."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 157:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "May Allah curse the Jews! When Allah forbade them to
eat the fat of animals, they melted it and sold it, and utilized its price! "
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 158:
Narrated Abu Wail:
'Abdullah (bin Mas'ud) said, "None has more sense of ghaira than Allah
therefore - He prohibits shameful sins (illegal sexual intercourse, etc.)
whether committed openly or secretly. And none loves to be praised more
than Allah does, and for this reason He praises Himself." I asked Abu Wali,
"Did you hear it from Abdullah?" He said, "Yes," I said, "Did Abdullah ascribe
it to Allah's Apostle?" He said, "Yes."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 159:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The Hour will not be established until the sun rises
from the West: and when the people see it, then whoever will be living on
the surface of the earth will have faith, and that is (the time) when no good
will it do to a soul to believe then, if it believed not before." (6.158)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 160:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The hour will not be established till the sun rises from
the West; and when it rises (from the West) and the people see it, they all
will believe. And that is (the time) when no good will it do to a soul to
believe then." Then he recited the whole Verse (6.158)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 161:
Narrated Abdullah bin Mas'ud:
Allah's Apostle said, "None has more sense of ghaira than Allah, and for this
He has forbidden shameful sins whether committed openly or secretly, an
none loves to be praised more than Allah does, and this is why He Praises
Himself."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 162:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
A man from the Jews, having been slapped on his face, came to the Prophet
and said, "O Muhammad! A man from your companions from the Ansar has
slapped me on my face!" The Prophet said, "Call him." When they called him,
the Prophet said, "Why did you slap him?" He said, "O Allah's Apostle! While
I was passing by the Jews, I heard him saying, 'By Him Who selected Moses
above the human beings,' I said, 'Even above Muhammad?' I became furious
and slapped him on the face." The Prophet said, "Do not give me superiority
over the other prophets, for on the Day of Resurrection the people will
become unconscious and I will be the first to regain consciousness. Then I
will see Moses holding one of the legs of the Throne. I will not know
whether he has come to his senses before me or that the shock he had
received at the Mountain, (during his worldly life) was sufficient for him."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 163:
Narrated Said Ibn Zaid:
The Prophet said, "Al-Kam'a is like the Mann (sweet resin or gum) (in that it
grows naturally without human care) and its water is a cure for the eye
diseases."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 164:
Narrated Abu Ad-Darda:
There was a dispute between Abu Bakr and 'Umar, and Abu Bakr made
Umar angry. So 'Umar left angrily. Abu Bakr followed him, requesting him to
ask forgiveness (of Allah) for him, but 'Umar refused to do so and closed his
door in Abu Bakr's face. So Abu Bakr went to Allah's Apostle while we were
with him. Allah's Apostle said, "This friend of yours must have quarrelled
(with somebody)." In the meantime 'Umar repented and felt sorry for what
he had done, so he came, greeted (those who were present) and sat with
the Prophet and related the story to him. Allah's Apostle became angry and
Abu Bakr started saying, "O Allah's Apostle! By Allah, I was more at fault
(than Umar)." Allah's Apostle said, "Are you (people) leaving for me my
companion? (Abu Bakr), Are you (people) leaving for me my companion?
When I said, 'O people I am sent to you all as the Apostle of Allah,' you said,
'You tell a lie.' while Abu Bakr said, 'You have spoken the truth ."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 165:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "It was said to the children of Israel, 'Enter the gate in
prostration and say Hitatun. (7.161) We shall forgive you, your faults.' But
they changed (Allah's Order) and entered, dragging themselves on their
buttocks and said, 'Habatun (a grain) in a Sha'ratin (hair)."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 166:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
'Uyaina bin Hisn bin Hudhaifa came and stayed with his nephew Al-Hurr bin
Qais who was one of those whom 'Umar used to keep near him, as the
Qurra' (learned men knowing Qur'an by heart) were the people of 'Umar's
meetings and his advisors whether they were old or young. 'Uyaina said to
his nephew, "O son of my brother! You have an approach to this chief, so
get for me the permission to see him." Al-Hurr said, "I will get the
permission for you to see him." So Al-Hurr asked the permission for 'Uyaina
and 'Umar admitted him. When 'Uyaina entered upon him, he said, "Beware!
O the son of Al-Khattab! By Allah, you neither give us sufficient provision nor
judge among us with justice." Thereupon 'Umar became so furious that he
intended to harm him, but Al-Hurr said, "O chief of the Believers! Allah said
to His Prophet: "Hold to forgiveness; command what is right; and leave
(don't punish) the foolish." (7.199) and this (i.e. 'Uyaina) is one of the
foolish." By Allah, 'Umar did not overlook that Verse when Al-Hurr recited it
before him; he observed (the orders of) Allah's Book strictly.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 167:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin AzZubair:
(The Verse) "Hold to forgiveness; command what is right..." was revealed by
Allah except in connection with the character of the people. 'Abdullah bin
Az-Zubair said: Allah ordered His Prophet to forgive the people their
misbehavior (towards him).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 168:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
I asked Ibn 'Abbas regarding Surat-al-Anfal. He said, "It was revealed in
connection with the Battle of Badr."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 169:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Regarding the Verse: "Verily! The worst of beasts in the Sight of Allah are
the deaf and the dumb----those who understand not." (8.22)
(The people referred to here) were some persons from the tribe of Bani
'Abd-Addar.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 170:
Narrated Abu Said bin Al-Mu'alla:
While I was praying, Allah's Apostle passed me and called me, but I did not
go to him until I had finished the prayer. Then I went to him, and he said,
"What prevented you from coming to me? Didn't Allah say:-- "O you who
believe! Answer the call of Allah (by obeying Him) and His Apostle when He
calls you?" He then said, "I will inform you of the greatest Sura in the Qur'an
before I leave (the mosque)." When Allah's Apostle got ready to leave (the
mosque), I reminded him. He said, "It is: 'Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the
worlds.' (i.e. Surat-al-Fatiha) As-sab'a Al-Mathani (the seven repeatedly
recited Verses)."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 171:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Abu Jahl said, "O Allah! If this (Quran) is indeed the Truth from You, then
rain down on us a shower of stones from the sky or bring on us a painful
torment." So Allah revealed:-- "But Allah would not punish them while you
were amongst them, nor He will punish them while they seek (Allah's)
forgiveness..." (8.33) And why Allah should not punish them while they turn
away (men) from Al-Masjid-al-Haram (the Sacred Mosque of Mecca)..."
(8.33-34)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 172:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Abu Jahl said, "O Allah! If this (Qur'an) is indeed the Truth from You), then
rain down on us a shower of stones from the sky or bring on us a painful
punishment." So there was revealed:-- 'But Allah would not punish them
while you (Muhammad) were amongst them, nor will He punish them while
they seek (Allah's) Forgiveness. And why Allah should not punish them while
they stop (men) from Al-Masjid-al-Haram ..' (8.33-34)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 173:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
That a man came to him (while two groups of Muslims were fighting) and
said, "O Abu 'Abdur Rahman! Don't you hear what Allah has mentioned in
His Book:
'And if two groups of believers fight against each other...' (49.9)
So what prevents you from fighting as Allah has mentioned in His Book?"'
Ibn 'Umar said, "O son of my brother! I would rather be blamed for not
fighting because of this Verse than to be blamed because of another Verse
where Allah says:
'And whoever kills a believer intentionally..." (4.93) Then that man said,
"Allah says:-- 'And fight them until there is no more afflictions (worshipping
other besides Allah) and the religion (i.e. worship) will be all for Allah
(Alone)" (8.39) Ibn 'Umar said, "We did this during the lifetime of Allah's
Apostle when the number of Muslims was small, and a man was put to trial
because of his religion, the pagans would either kill or chain him; but when
the Muslims increased (and Islam spread), there was no persecution." When
that man saw that Ibn 'Umar did not agree to his proposal, he said, "What is
your opinion regarding 'Ali and 'Uthman?" Ibn 'Umar said, "What is my
opinion regarding Ali and 'Uthman? As for 'Uthman, Allah forgave him and
you disliked to forgive him, and Ali is the cousin and son-in-law of Allah's
Apostle ." Then he pointed out with his hand and said, "And that is his
daughter's (house) which you can see."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 174:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
Ibn 'Umar came to us and a man said (to him), "What do you think about
'Qit-alal-Fitnah' (fighting caused by afflictions)." Ibn 'Umar said (to him),
"And do you understand what an affliction is? Muhammad used to fight
against the pagans, and his fighting with them was an affliction, (and his
fighting was) not like your fighting which is carried on for the sake of
ruling."
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 175:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
When the Verse:-- "If there are twenty steadfast amongst you, they will
overcome two hundred." (8.65) was revealed, then it became obligatory for
the Muslims that one (Muslim) should not flee from ten (non-Muslims).
Sufyan (the sub-narrator) once said, "Twenty (Muslims) should not flee
before two hundred (non Muslims)." Then there was revealed: 'But now
Allah has lightened your (task)..' (8.66)
So it became obligatory that one-hundred (Muslims) should not flee before
two hundred (non-muslims). (Once Sufyan said extra, "The Verse: 'Urge the
believers to the fight. If there are twenty steadfast amongst you (Muslims)
..' was revealed.) Sufyan said, "Ibn Shabrama said, "I see that this order is
applicable to the obligation of enjoining good and forbidding evil."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 176:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
When the Verse:--'If there are twenty steadfast amongst you (Muslims),
they will overcome two-hundred (non-Muslims).' was revealed, it became
hard on the Muslims when it became compulsory that one Muslim ought not
to flee (in war) before ten (non-Muslims). So (Allah) lightened the order by
revealing:
'(But) now Allah has lightened your (task) for He knows that there is
weakness in you. So if there are of you one-hundred steadfast, they will
overcome (two-hundred (non-Muslims).' (8.66) So when Allah reduced the
number of enemies which Muslims should withstand, their patience and
perseverance against the enemy decreased as much as their task was
lightened for them.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 177:
Narrated Al-Bara:
The last Verse that was revealed was:
'They ask you for a legal verdict: Say: Allah directs (thus) about Al-Kalalah
(those who leave no descendants or ascendants as heirs).' And the last Sura
which was revealed was Baraatun (9) .

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 178:
Narrated Humaid bin Abdur-Rahman:
Abu Huraira said, "During that Hajj (in which Abu Bakr was the chief of the
pilgrims) Abu Bakr sent me along with announcers on the Day of Nahr ( 10th
of Dhul-Hijja) in Mina to announce: "No pagans shall perform, Hajj after this
year, and none shall perform the Tawaf around the Ka'ba in a naked state."
Humaid bin 'Abdur Rahman added: Then Allah's Apostle sent Ali bin Abi Talib
(after Abu Bakr) and ordered him to recite aloud in public Surat Bara'a. Abu
Huraira added, "So 'Ali, along with us, recited Bara'a (loudly) before the
people at Mina on the Day of Nahr and announced; "No pagan shall perform
Hajj after this year and none shall perform the Tawaf around the Ka'ba in a
naked state."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 179:
Narrated Humaid bin Abdur Rahman:
Abu Huraira said, "Abu Bakr sent me in that Hajj in which he was the chief of
the pilgrims along with the announcers whom he sent on the Day of Nahr to
announce at Mina: "No pagan shall perform Hajj after this year, and none
shall perform the Tawaf around the Ka'ba in a naked state." Humaid added:
That the Prophet sent 'Ali bin Abi Talib (after Abu Bakr) and ordered him to
recite aloud in public Surat-Baraa. Abu Huraira added, "So 'Ali, along with us,
recited Bara'a (loudly) before the people at Mina on the Day of Nahr and
announced "No pagan shall perform Hajj after this year and none shall
perform the Tawaf around the Ka'ba in a naked state."..except those pagans
with whom you (Muslims) have a treaty." (9.4)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 180:
Narrated Humaid bin 'Abdur-Rahman:
Abu Huraira said that Abu Bakr sent him during the Hajj in which Abu Bakr
was made the chief of the pilgrims by Allah's Apostle before (the year of)
Hajjat al-Wada in a group (of announcers) to announce before the people;
'No pagan shall perform the Hajj after this year, and none shall perform the
Tawaf around the Ka'ba in a naked state. Humaid used to say The Day of
Nahr is the day of Al-Hajj Al-Akbar (the Greatest Day) because of the
narration of Abu Huraira.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 181:
Narrated Zaid bin Wahb:
We were with Hudhaifa and he said, "None remains of the people described
by this Verse (9.12), "Except three, and of the hypocrites except four." A
bedouin said, "You the companions of Muhammad! Tell us (things) and we
do not know that about those who break open our houses and steal our
precious things? ' He (Hudhaifa) replied, "Those are Al Fussaq (rebellious
wrongdoers) (not disbelievers or hypocrites). Really, none remains of them
(hypocrite) but four, one of whom is a very old man who, if he drinks water,
does not feel its coldness."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 182:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The Kanz (money, the Zakat of which is not paid) of
anyone of you will appear in the form of bald-headed poisonous male snake
on the Day of Resurrection."
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 183:
Narrated Zaid bin Wahb:
I passed by (visited ) Abu Dhar at Ar-Rabadha and said to him, "What has
brought you to this land?" He said, "We were at Sham and I recited the
Verse: "They who hoard up gold and silver and spend them not in the way of
Allah; announce to them a painful torment, " (9.34) where upon Muawiya
said, 'This Verse is not for us, but for the people of the Scripture.' Then I
said, 'But it is both for us (Muslim) and for them.' "

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 184:
Narrated Abu Bakr:
The Prophet said, "Time has come back to its original state which it had
when Allah created the Heavens and the Earth; the year is twelve months,
four of which are sacred. Three of them are in succession; Dhul-Qa'da, DhulHijja and Al-Muharram, and (the fourth being) Rajab Mudar (named after the
tribe of Mudar as they used to respect this month) which stands between
Jumad (ath-thani) and Sha'ban."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 185:
Narrated Abu Bakr:
I was in the company of the Prophet in the cave, and on seeing the traces of
the pagans, I said, "O Allah's Apostle If one of them (pagans) should lift up
his foot, he will see us." He said, "What do you think of two, the third of
whom is Allah?"

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 186:
Narrated Ibn Abi Mulaika:
When there happened the disagreement between Ibn Az-Zubair and Ibn
'Abbas, I said (to the latter), "(Why don't you take the oath of allegiance to
him as) his father is Az-Zubair, and his mother is Asma,' and his aunt is
'Aisha, and his maternal grandfather is Abu Bakr, and his grandmother is
Safiya?"

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 187:
Narrated Ibn Abi Mulaika:
There was a disagreement between them (i.e. Ibn 'Abbas and Ibn Az-Zubair)
so I went to Ibn 'Abbas in the morning and said (to him), "Do you want to
fight against Ibn Zubair and thus make lawful what Allah has made unlawful
(i.e. fighting in Meccas?" Ibn 'Abbas said, "Allah forbid! Allah ordained that
Ibn Zubair and Bani Umaiya would permit (fighting in Mecca), but by Allah, I
will never regard it as permissible." Ibn Abbas added. "The people asked me
to take the oath of allegiance to Ibn AzZubair. I said, 'He is really entitled to
assume authority for his father, Az-Zubair was the helper of the Prophet, his
(maternal) grandfather, Abu Bakr was (the Prophet's) companion in the
cave, his mother, Asma' was 'Dhatun-Nitaq', his aunt, 'Aisha was the mother
of the Believers, his paternal aunt, Khadija was the wife of the Prophet , and
the paternal aunt of the Prophet was his grandmother. He himself is pious
and chaste in Islam, well versed in the Knowledge of the Quran. By Allah!
(Really, I left my relatives, Bani Umaiya for his sake though) they are my
close relatives, and if they should be my rulers, they are equally apt to be so
and are descended from a noble family.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 188:
Narrated Ibn Abi Mulaika:
We entered upon Ibn 'Abbas and he said "Are you not astonished at Ibn AzZubair's assuming the caliphate?" I said (to myself), "I will support him and
speak of his good traits as I did not do even for Abu Bakr and 'Umar though
they were more entitled to receive al I good than he was." I said "He (i.e Ibn
Az-Zubair) is the son of the aunt of the Prophet and the son of AzZubair, and
the grandson of Abu Bakr and the son of Khadija's brother, and the son of
'Aisha's sister." Nevertheless, he considers himself to be superior to me and
does not want me to be one of his friends. So I said, "I never expected that
he would refuse my offer to support him, and I don't think he intends to do
me any good, therefore, if my cousins should inevitably be my rulers, it will
be better for me to be ruled by them than by some others."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 190:
Narrated Abu Musud:
When we were ordered to give alms, we began to work as porters (to earn
something we could give in charity). Abu Uqail came with one half of a Sa
(special measure for food grains) and another person brought more than he
did. So the hypocrites said, "Allah is not in need of the alms of this (i.e.
'Uqail); and this other person did not give alms but for showing off." Then
Allah revealed:-'Those who criticize such of the Believers who give charity voluntarily and
those who could not find to give in charity except what is available to them.'
(9.79)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 191:
Narrated Shaqiq:
Abu Mas'ud Al-Ansari said, "Allah's Apostle, used to order us to give alms. So
one of us would exert himself to earn one Mud (special measure of wheat or
dates, etc.,) to give in charity; while today one of us may have one hundred
thousand." Shaqiq said: As if Abu Masud referred to himself.
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 192:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
When 'Abdullah bin 'Ubai died, his son 'Abdullah bin 'Abdullah came to
Allah's Apostle and asked him to give him his shirt in order to shroud his
father in it. He gave it to him and then 'Abdullah asked the Prophet to offer
the funeral prayer for him (his father). Allah's Apostle got up to offer the
funeral prayer for him, but Umar got up too and got hold of the garment of
Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle Will you offer the funeral prayer
for him though your Lord has forbidden you to offer the prayer for him"
Allah's Apostle said, "But Allah has given me the choice by saying:
'(Whether you) ask forgiveness for them, or do not ask forgiveness for
them; even if you ask forgiveness for them seventy times..' (9.80) so I will
ask more than seventy times." 'Umar said, "But he ('Abdullah bin 'Ubai) is a
hypocrite!" However, Allah's Apostle did offer the funeral prayer for him
whereupon Allah revealed:
'And never (O Muhammad) pray for anyone of them that dies, nor stand at
his grave.' (9.84)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 193:
Narrated Umar bin Al-Khattab:
When 'Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul died, Allah's Apostle was called in order to
offer the funeral prayer for him. When Allah's Apostle got up (to offer the
prayer) I jumped towards him and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Do you offer the
prayer for Ibn Ubai although he said so-and-so on such-and-such-a day?" I
went on mentioning his sayings. Allah's Apostle smiled and said, "Keep away
from me, O 'Umar!" But when I spoke too much to him, he said, "I have been
given the choice, and I have chosen (this) ; and if I knew that if I asked
forgiveness for him more than seventy times, he would be for given, I would
ask it for more times than that." So Allah's Apostle offered the funeral
prayer for him and then left, but he did not stay long before the two Verses
of Surat-Bara'a were revealed, i.e.:-- 'And never (O Muhammad) pray for
anyone of them that dies.... and died in a state of rebellion.' (9.84) Later I
was astonished at my daring to speak like that to Allah's Apostle and Allah
and His Apostle know best.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 194:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
When Abdullah bin Ubai died, his son 'Abdullah bin 'Abdullah came to Allah's
Apostle who gave his shirt to him and ordered him to shroud his father in it.
Then he stood up to offer the funeral prayer for the deceased, but 'Umar bin
Al-Khattab took hold of his garment and said, "Do you offer the funeral
prayer for him though he was a hypocrite and Allah has forbidden you to ask
forgiveness for hypocrites?" The Prophet said, "Allah has given me the
choice (or Allah has informed me) saying:
"Whether you, O Muhammad, ask forgiveness for them, or do not ask
forgiveness for them, even if you ask forgiveness for them seventy times,
Allah will not forgive them," (9.80) The he added, "I will (appeal to Allah for
his sake) more than seventy times." So Allah's Apostle offered the funeral
prayer for him and we too, offered the prayer along with him. Then Allah
revealed: "And never, O Muhammad, pray (funeral prayer) for anyone of
them that dies, nor stand at his grave. Certainly they disbelieved in Allah and
His Apostle and died in a state of rebellion." (9.84)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 195:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Ka'b:
I heard Ka'b bin Malik at the time he remained behind and did not join (the
battle of) Tabuk, saying, "By Allah, no blessing has Allah bestowed upon me,
besides my guidance to Islam, better than that of helping me speak the
truth to Allah's Apostle otherwise I would have told the Prophet a lie and
would have been ruined like those who had told a lie when the Divine
Inspiration was revealed:-- "They will swear by Allah to you (Muslims) when
you return to them.. the rebellious people." (9.95-96)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 196:
Narrated Samura bin Jundab:
Allah's Apostle said, "Tonight two (visitors) came to me (in my dream) and
took me to a town built with gold bricks and silver bricks. There we met men
who, half of their bodies, look like the most-handsome human beings you
have ever seen, and the other half, the ugliest human beings you have ever
seen. Those two visitors said to those men, 'Go and dip yourselves in that
river. So they dipped themselves therein and then came to us, their ugliness
having disappeared and they were in the most-handsome shape. The visitors
said, 'The first is the Garden of Eden and that is your dwelling place.' Then
they added, 'As for those people who were half ugly and half handsome,
they were those who mixed good deeds and bad deeds, but Allah forgave
them."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 197:
Narrated Al-Musaiyab:
When Abu Talib's death approached, the Prophet went to him while Abu
Jahl and 'Abdullah bin Abi Umaiya were present with him. The Prophet said,
"O uncle, say: None has the right to be worshipped except Allah, so that I
may argue for your case with it before Allah." On that, Abu Jahl and
'Abdullah bin Abu Umaiya said, "O Abu Talib! Do you want to renounce
'Abdul Muttalib's religion?" Then the Prophet said, "I will keep on asking
(Allah for) forgiveness for you unless I am forbidden to do so." Then there
was revealed:-'It is not fitting for the Prophet and those who believe that they should
invoke (Allah) for forgiveness for pagans even though they be of kin, after it
has become clear to them that they are companions of the Fire.' (9.113)
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 198:
Narrated Abdullah bin Ka'b:
I heard Ka'b bin Malik talking about the Verse:-- 'And to the three (He also
forgave) who remained behind.' (9.118) saying in the last portion of his talk,
"(I said), 'As a part (sign) of my repentance, I would like to give up all my
property in the cause of Allah and His Apostle,' The Prophet said to me,
'Keep some of your wealth as it is good for you." (To the three (He also
forgave) who remained behind till for them the earth, vast as it is, was
straitened..." (9.118)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 199:
Narrated Abdullah bin Kab:
I heard Ka'b bin Malik who was one of the three who were forgiven, saying
that he had never remained behind Allah's Apostle in any Ghazwa which he
had fought except two Ghazwat Ghazwat-al'Usra (Tabuk) and GhazwatBadr. He added. "I decided to tell the truth to Allah's Apostle in the
forenoon, and scarcely did he return from a journey he made, except in the
forenoon, he would go first to the mosque and offer a two-Rak'at prayer.
The Prophet forbade others to speak to me or to my two companions, but
he did not prohibit speaking to any of those who had remained behind
excepting us. So the people avoided speaking to us, and I stayed in that
state till I could no longer bear it, and the only thing that worried me was
that I might die and the Prophet would not offer the funeral prayer for me,
or Allah's Apostle might die and I would be left in that social status among
the people that nobody would speak to me or offer the funeral prayer for
me. But Allah revealed His Forgiveness for us to the Prophet in the last third
of the night while Allah's Apostle was with Um Salama. Um Salama
sympathized with me and helped me in my disaster. Allah's Apostle said, 'O
Um Salama! Ka'b has been forgiven!' She said, 'Shall I send someone to him
to give him the good tidings?' He said, 'If you did so, the people would not
let you sleep the rest of the night.' So when the Prophet had offered the Fajr
prayer, he announced Allah's Forgiveness for us. His face used to look as
bright as a piece of the (full) moon whenever he was pleased. When Allah
revealed His Forgiveness for us, we were the three whose case had been
deferred while the excuse presented by those who had apologized had
been accepted. But when there were mentioned those who had told the
Prophet lies and remained behind (the battle of Tabuk) and had given false
excuses, they were described with the worse description one may be
described with. Allah said: 'They will present their excuses to you (Muslims)
when you return to them. Say: Present no excuses; we shall not believe you.
Allah has already informed us of the true state of matters concerning you.
Allah and His Apostle will observe your actions." (9.94)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 200:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Kab:
I heard Ka'b bin Malik talking about the story of the battle of Tabuk when he
remained behind, "By Allah, I do not know anyone whom Allah has helped
for telling the truth more than me since I mentioned that truth to Allah's
Apostle till today, I have never intended to tell a lie. And Allah revealed to
His Apostle: "Verily! Allah has forgiven the Prophet, the Muhajirin............ and
be with those who are true (in words and deeds)." (9.117-119) (See Hadith
No. 702 Vol 5).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 201:
Narrated Zaid bin Thabit Al-Ansari:
who was one of those who used to write the Divine Revelation: Abu Bakr
sent for me after the (heavy) casualties among the warriors (of the battle)
of Yamama (where a great number of Qurra' were killed). 'Umar was
present with Abu Bakr who said, 'Umar has come to me and said, The
people have suffered heavy casualties on the day of (the battle of) Yamama,
and I am afraid that there will be more casualties among the Qurra' (those
who know the Qur'an by heart) at other battle-fields, whereby a large part
of the Qur'an may be lost, unless you collect it. And I am of the opinion that
you should collect the Qur'an." Abu Bakr added, "I said to 'Umar, 'How can I
do something which Allah's Apostle has not done?' 'Umar said (to me), 'By
Allah, it is (really) a good thing.' So 'Umar kept on pressing, trying to
persuade me to accept his proposal, till Allah opened my bosom for it and I
had the same opinion as 'Umar." (Zaid bin Thabit added:) Umar was sitting
with him (Abu Bakr) and was not speaking. me). "You are a wise young man
and we do not suspect you (of telling lies or of forgetfulness): and you used
to write the Divine Inspiration for Allah's Apostle. Therefore, look for the
Qur'an and collect it (in one manuscript). " By Allah, if he (Abu Bakr) had
ordered me to shift one of the mountains (from its place) it would not have
been harder for me than what he had ordered me concerning the collection
of the Qur'an. I said to both of them, "How dare you do a thing which the
Prophet has not done?" Abu Bakr said, "By Allah, it is (really) a good thing.
So I kept on arguing with him about it till Allah opened my bosom for that
which He had opened the bosoms of Abu Bakr and Umar. So I started
locating Quranic material and collecting it from parchments, scapula, leafstalks of date palms and from the memories of men (who knew it by heart).
I found with Khuzaima two Verses of Surat-at-Tauba which I had not found
with anybody else, (and they were):-"Verily there has come to you an Apostle (Muhammad) from amongst
yourselves. It grieves him that you should receive any injury or difficulty He
(Muhammad) is ardently anxious over you (to be rightly guided)" (9.128)
The manuscript on which the Quran was collected, remained with Abu Bakr
till Allah took him unto Him, and then with 'Umar till Allah took him unto
Him, and finally it remained with Hafsa, Umar's daughter.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 202:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
When the Prophet arrived at Medina, the Jews were observing the fast on
'Ashura' (10th of Muharram) and they said, "This is the day when Moses
became victorious over Pharaoh," On that, the Prophet said to his
companions, "You (Muslims) have more right to celebrate Moses' victory
than they have, so observe the fast on this day."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 203:
Narrated Muhammad bin 'Abbas bin Ja'far:
That he heard Ibn 'Abbas reciting: "No doubt! They fold up their breasts."
(11.5) and asked him about its explanation. He said, "Some people used to
hide themselves while answering the call of nature in an open space lest
they be exposed to the sky, and also when they had sexual relation with
their wives in an open space lest they be exposed to the sky, so the above
revelation was sent down regarding them."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 204:
Narrated Muhammad bin Abbas bin Ja'far:
Ibn Abbas recited. "No doubt! They fold up their breasts." I said, "O Abu
Abbas! What is meant by "They fold up their breasts?" He said, "A man used
to feel shy on having sexual relation with his wife or on answering the call of
nature (in an open space) so this Verse was revealed:-- "No doubt! They fold
up their breasts."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 205:
Narrated 'Amr:
Ibn 'Abbas recited:-- "No doubt! They fold up their breasts in order to hide
from Him. Surely! Even when they cover themselves with their garments.."
(11.5)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 206:
Narrated Abu Huraira
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah said, 'Spend (O man), and I shall spend on you."
He also said, "Allah's Hand is full, and (its fullness) is not affected by the
continuous spending night and day." He also said, "Do you see what He has
spent since He created the Heavens and the Earth? Nevertheless, what is in
His Hand is not decreased, and His Throne was over the water; and in His
Hand there is the balance (of justice) whereby He raises and lowers
(people)."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 207:
Narrated Safwan bin Muhriz:
While Ibn Umar was performing the Tawaf (around the Ka'ba), a man came
up to him and said, "O Abu 'AbdurRahman!" or said, "O Ibn Umar! Did you
hear anything from the Prophet about An-Najwa?" Ibn 'Umar said, "I heard
the Prophet saying, 'The Believer will be brought near his Lord." (Hisham, a
sub-narrator said, reporting the Prophet's words), "The believer will come
near (his Lord) till his Lord covers him with His screen and makes him
confess his sins. (Allah will ask him), 'Do you know (that you did) 'such-andsuch sin?" He will say twice, 'Yes, I do.' Then Allah will say, 'I concealed it in
the world and I forgive it for you today.' Then the record of his good deeds
will be folded up. As for the others, or the disbelievers, it will be announced
publicly before the witnesses: 'These are ones who lied against their Lord."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 208:
Narrated Abu Musa:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah gives respite to the oppressor, but when He
takes him over, He never releases him." Then he recited:-"Such is the seizure of your Lord when He seizes (population of) towns in
the midst of their wrong: Painful indeed, and severe is His seizure.' (11.102)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 209:
Narrated Ibn Masud:
A man kissed a woman and then came to Allah's Apostle and told him of
that, so this Divine Inspiration was revealed to the Prophet 'And offer
Prayers perfectly at the two ends of the day, and in some hours of the night;
(i.e. (five) compulsory prayers). Verily, the good deeds remove the evil
deeds (small sins) That is a reminder for the mindful.' (11.114) The man said,
Is this instruction for me only?' The Prophet said, "It is for all those of my
followers who encounter a similar situation."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 210:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:
The Prophet said, "The honorable, the son of the honorable the son of the
honorable, i.e. Joseph, the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of
Abraham."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 211:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle was asked, "Who are the most honorable of the people?"
The Prophet said, "The most honorable of them in Allah's Sight are those
who keep their duty to Allah and fear Him. They said, "We do not ask you
about that." He said, "Then the most honorable of the people is Joseph,
Allah's prophet, the son of Allah's prophet, the son of Allah's prophet, the
son of Allah's Khalil i.e. Abraham) They said, "We do not ask you about
that." The Prophet said, Do you ask about (the virtues of the ancestry of the
Arabs?" They said, "Yes," He said, "Those who were the best amongst you in
the Pre-lslamic Period are the

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 212:
Narrated Az-Zuhri:
Urwa bin Az-Zubair, Said bin Al-Musaiyab, 'Al-Qama bin Waqqas and
'Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah related the narration of 'Aisha, the wife the
Prophet, when the slanderers had said about her what they had said and
Allah later declared her innocence. Each of them related a part of the
narration (wherein) the Prophet said (to 'Aisha). "If you are innocent, then
Allah will declare your innocence: but if you have committed a sin, then ask
for Allah's Forgiveness and repent to him." 'Aisha said, "By Allah, I find no
example for my case except that of Joseph's father (when he said), 'So (for
me) patience is most fitting.' " Then Allah revealed the ten Verses:-- "Verily
those who spread the slander are a gang amongst you.." (24.11)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 213:
Narrated Um Ruman:
Who was 'Aisha's mother: While I was with 'Aisha, 'Aisha got fever,
whereupon the Prophet said, "Probably her fever is caused by the story
related by the people (about her)." I said, "Yes." Then 'Aisha sat up and said,
"My example and your example is similar to that of Jacob and his sons:-'Nay, but your minds have made up a tale. So (for me) patience is most
fitting. It is Allah (alone) Whose help can be sought against that which you
assert.' (12.18)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 214:
Narrated Abu Wail:
'Abdullah bin Mas'ud recited "Haita laka (Come you)," and added, "We
recite it as we were taught it."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 215:
Narrated Abdullah (bin Mas'ud):
When the Prophet realized that the Quraish had delayed in embracing Islam,
he said, "O Allah! Protect me against their evil by afflicting them with seven
(years of famine) like the seven years of (Prophet) Joseph." So they were
struck with a year of famine that destroyed everything till they had to eat
bones, and till a man would look towards the sky and see something like
smoke between him and it. Allah said:-"Then watch you (O Muhammad) for the day when the sky will produce a
kind of smoke plainly visible." (44.10) And Allah further said:-- "Verily! We
shall withdraw the punishment a little, Verily you will return (to disbelief)."
(44.15) (Will Allah relieve them from torture on the Day of Resurrection?)
(The punishment of) the smoke had passed and Al-Baltsha (the destruction
of the pagans in the Badr battle) had passed too.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 216:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "May Allah bestow His Mercy on (Prophet) Lot. (When
his nation troubled him) he wished if he could betake himself to some
powerful support; and if I were to remain in prison for the period Joseph
had remained, I would surely respond to the call; and we shall have more
right (to be in doubt) than Abraham: When Allah said to him, "Don't you
believe?' Abraham said, 'Yes, (I do believe) but to be stronger in faith;
(2.260)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 217:
Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair:
That when he asked 'Aisha about the statement of Allah "Until when the
Apostles gave up hope (of their people)." (12.110) she told him (its meaning),
'Urwa added, "I said, 'Did they (Apostles) suspect that they were betrayed
(by Allah) or that they were treated as liars by (their people)?' 'Aisha said,
'(They suspected) that they were treated as liars by (their people),' I said,
'But they were sure that their people treated them as liars and it was not a
matter of suspicion.' She said, 'Yes, upon my life they were sure about it.' I
said to her. 'So they (Apostles) suspected that they were betrayed (by
Allah).' She said, "Allah forbid! The Apostles never suspected their Lord of
such a thing.' I said, 'What about this Verse then?' She said, 'It is about the
Apostles' followers who believed in their Lord and trusted their Apostles,
but the period of trials was prolonged and victory was delayed till the
Apostles gave up all hope of converting those of the people who disbelieved
them and the Apostles thought that their followers treated them as liars;
thereupon Allah's help came to them.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 218:
Narrated 'Urwa:
"I told her ('Aisha): (Regarding the above narration), they (Apostles) were
betrayed (by Allah)." She said: Allah forbid or said similarly.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 219:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "The keys of Unseen are five which none knows but
Allah: None knows what will happen tomorrow but Allah; none knows what
is in the wombs (a male child or a female) but Allah; none knows when it will
rain but Allah; none knows at what place one will die; none knows when the
Hour will be established but Allah." (See The Quran 31:34.")

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 220:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
While we were with Allah's Apostle he said, "Tell me of a tree which
resembles a Muslim man. Its leaves do not fall and it does not, and does not,
and does not, and it gives its fruits every now and then." It came to my mind
that such a tree must be the date palm, but seeing Abu Bakr and 'Umar
saying nothing, I disliked to speak. So when they did not say anything,
Allah's Apostle said, "It is the date-palm tree." When we got up (from that
place), I said to 'Umar, "O my father! By Allah, it came to my mind that it
must be the date palm tree." 'Umar said, "What prevented you from
speaking" I replied, "I did not see you speaking, so I misliked to speak or say
anything." Umar then said, "If you had said it, it would have been dearer to
me than so-and-so."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 221:
Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib:
Allah's Apostle said, "When a Muslim is questioned in his grave, he will
testify that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and that
Muhammad is Allah's Apostle, and that is what is meant by Allah's
Statement:-"Allah will keep firm those who believe with a Word that stands firm in this
world and in the Hereafter." (14.27)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 222:
Narrated Ata:
When Ibn 'Abbas heard:-- "Have you not seen those who have changed the
favor of Allah into disbelief?" (14.28) he said, "Those were the disbelieving
pagans of Mecca."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 223:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "When Allah has ordained some affair in the Heaven, the
angels beat with their wings in obedience to His statement, which sounds
like a chain dragged over a rock." ('Ali and other sub-narrators said, "The
sound reaches them.") "Until when fear is banished from their (angels)
hearts, they (angels) say, 'What was it that your Lord said? They say, 'The
truth; And He is the Most High, the Most Great.' (34.23) Then those who
gain a hearing by stealing (i.e. devils) will hear Allah's Statement:-- 'Those
who gain a hearing by stealing, (stand one over the other like this).
(Sufyan, to illustrate this, spread the fingers of his right hand and placed
them one over the other horizontally.) A flame may overtake and burn the
eavesdropper before conveying the news to the one below him; or it may
not overtake him till he has conveyed it to the one below him, who in his
turn, conveys it to the one below him, and so on till they convey the news to
the earth. (Or probably Sufyan said, "Till the news reaches the earth.") Then
the news is inspired to a sorcerer who would add a hundred lies to it. His
prophecy will prove true (as far as the heavenly news is concerned). The
people will say. 'Didn't he tell us that on such-and-such a day, such-and-such
a thing will happen? We have found that is true because of the true news
heard from heaven."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 224:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
(The same Hadith above, starting: 'When Allah has ordained some affair...')
In this narration the word foreteller is added to the word wizard.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 225:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
(While we were going for the Battle of Tabuk and when we reached the
places of the dwellers of Al-Hijr), Allah's Apostle said about the dwellers of
Al-Hijr (to us). "Do not enter (the dwelling places) of these people unless
you enter weeping, but if you weep not, then do not enter upon them, lest
you be afflicted with what they were afflicted with."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 226:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Mualla:
While I was praying, the Prophet passed by and called me, but I did not go to
him till I had finished my prayer. When I went to him, he said, "What
prevented you from coming?" I said, "I was praying." He said, "Didn't Allah
say" "O you who believes Give your response to Allah (by obeying Him) and
to His Apostle." (8.24) Then he added, "Shall I tell you the most superior
Sura in the Qur'an before I go out of the mosque?" When the Prophet
intended to go out (of the Mosque), I reminded him and he said, "That is:
"Alhamdu-lillahi Rabbil-'Alamin (Surat-al-fatiha)' which is the seven oft
repeated verses (Al-Mathani) and the Grand Quran which has been given to
me."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 227:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The Um (substance) of the Quran is the seven oftrepeated verses (Al-Mathaini) and is the Great Quran (i.e. Surat-al-Fatiha)."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 228:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Those who have made their Scripture into parts are the people of the
Scripture who divided it into portions and believed in a part of it and
disbelieved the other.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 229:
Narrated Ibn Abbas: concerning:
"As We sent down (the Scripture) on those who are divided (Jews and
Christians)." (15.90) They believed in part of it and disbelieved in the other,
are the Jews and the Christians. the Christians.
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 230:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle used to invoke thus: "O Allah! I seek refuge with You from
miserliness, laziness; from old geriatric age the punishment in the grave;
from the affliction of Ad-Dajjal; and from the afflictions of life and death.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 231:
Narrated Ibn Mas'ud:
Surat Bani Israel and Al-Kahf and Mary are among my first old property.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 232:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle was presented with two cups one containing wine and the
other milk on the night of his night journey at Jerusalem. He looked at it and
took the milk. Gabriel said, "Thanks to Allah Who guided you to the Fitra (i.e.
Islam); if you had taken the wine, your followers would have gone astray.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 233:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "When the Quraish disbelieved me (concerning my night
journey), I stood up in Al-Hijr (the unroofed portion of the Ka'ba) and Allah
displayed Bait-ul-Maqdis before me, and I started to inform them (Quraish)
about its signs while looking at it."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 234:
Narrated Abdullah:
During the Pre-lslamic period of ignorance if any tribe became great in
number, we used to say, "Amira the children of so-and-so."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 235:
Narrated Al-Humaidi:
Sufyan narrated to us something and used the word 'Amira'.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 236:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Some (cooked) meat was brought to Allah Apostle and the meat of a
forearm was presented to him as he used to like it. He ate a morsel of it and
said, "I will be the chief of all the people on the Day of Resurrection. Do you
know the reason for it? Allah will gather all the human being of early
generations as well as late generation on one plain so that the announcer
will be able to make them all-hear his voice and the watcher will be able to
see all of them. The sun will come so close to the people that they will suffer
such distress and trouble as they will not be able to bear or stand. Then the
people will say, 'Don't you see to what state you have reached? Won't you
look for someone who can intercede for you with your Lord' Some people
will say to some others, 'Go to Adam.' So they will go to Adam and say to
him. 'You are the father of mankind; Allah created you with His Own Hand,
and breathed into you of His Spirit (meaning the spirit which he created for
you); and ordered the angels to prostrate before you; so (please) intercede
for us with your Lord. Don't you see in what state we are? Don't you see
what condition we have reached?' Adam will say, 'Today my Lord has
become angry as He has never become before, nor will ever become
thereafter. He forbade me (to eat of the fruit of) the tree, but I disobeyed
Him . Myself! Myself! Myself! (has more need for intercession). Go to
someone else; go to Noah.' So they will go to Noah and say (to him), 'O
Noah! You are the first (of Allah's Messengers) to the people of the earth,
and Allah has named you a thankful slave; please intercede for us with your
Lord. Don't you see in what state we are?' He will say.' Today my Lord has
become angry as He has never become nor will ever become thereafter. I
had (in the world) the right to make one definitely accepted invocation, and
I made it against my nation. Myself! Myself! Myself! Go to someone else; go
to Abraham.' They will go to Abraham and say, 'O Abraham! You are Allah's
Apostle and His Khalil from among the people of the earth; so please
intercede for us with your Lord. Don't you see in what state we are?' He will
say to them, 'My Lord has today become angry as He has never become
before, nor will ever become thereafter. I had told three lies (Abu Haiyan
(the sub-narrator) mentioned them in the Hadith) Myself! Myself! Myself! Go
to someone else; go to Moses.' The people will then go to Moses and say, 'O
Moses! You art Allah's Apostle and Allah gave you superiority above the
others with this message and with His direct Talk to you; (please) intercede
for us with your Lord Don't you see in what state we are?' Moses will say,
'My Lord has today become angry as He has never become before, nor will
become thereafter, I killed a person whom I had not been ordered to kill.
Myself! Myself! Myself! Go to someone else; go to Jesus.' So they will go to
Jesus and say, 'O Jesus! You are Allah's Apostle and His Word which He sent
to Mary, and a superior soul created by Him, and you talked to the people
while still young in the cradle. Please intercede for us with your Lord. Don't
you see in what state we are?' Jesus will say. 'My Lord has today become
angry as He has never become before nor will ever become thereafter. Jesus
will not mention any sin, but will say, 'Myself! Myself! Myself! Go to someone
else; go to Muhammad.' So they will come to me and say, 'O Muhammad !
You are Allah's Apostle and the last of the prophets, and Allah forgave your
early and late sins. (Please) intercede for us with your Lord. Don't you see in
what state we are?" The Prophet added, "Then I will go beneath Allah's
Throne and fall in prostration before my Lord. And then Allah will guide me
to such praises and glorification to Him as He has never guided anybody else
before me. Then it will be said, 'O Muhammad Raise your head. Ask, and it
will be granted. Intercede It (your intercession) will be accepted.' So I will
raise my head and Say, 'My followers, O my Lord! My followers, O my Lord'.
It will be said, 'O Muhammad! Let those of your followers who have no
accounts, enter through such a gate of the gates of Paradise as lies on the
right; and they will share the other gates with the people." The Prophet
further said, "By Him in Whose Hand my soul is, the distance between every
two gate-posts of Paradise is like the distance between Mecca and Busra (in
Sham)."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 237:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The recitation of Psalms (David's Quran) was made light
and easy for David that he used to have his ridding animal be saddled while
he would finish the recitation before the servant had saddled it."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 238:
Narrated Abdullah:
Regarding the explanation of the Verse: 'Those whom they call upon
(worship) (like Jesus the Son of Mary, angels etc.) desire (for themselves)
means of access to their Lord (Allah) as to which of them should be the
nearer and they hope for His Mercy and fear His torment.' (17.57) They
themselves (e.g. Angels, saints, Apostles, Jesus, etc.,) worshipped Allah,
Those Jinns who were worshipped by some Arabs became Muslims
(embraced Islam), but those human beings stuck to their (old) religion. AlAmash said extra: 'Say, (O Muhammad): Call unto those besides Him whom
you assume (to be gods).' (17.56)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 239:
Narrated Abdullah:
Regarding the Verse: 'Those whom they call upon (worship) (like Jesus the
Son of Mary or angels etc.) desire (for themselves) means of access, to their
Lord....' (17.57) (It was revealed regarding) some Jinns who used to be
worshipped (by human beings). They later embraced Islam (while those
people kept on worshipping them).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 240:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Regarding: 'And We granted the vision (Ascension to the Heaven "Miraj")
which We showed you (O Muhammad as an actual eye witness) but as a trial
for mankind.' (17.60) It was an actual eye-witness which was shown to
Allah's Apostle during the night he was taken on a journey (through the
heavens). And the cursed tree is the tree of Az-Zaqqum (a bitter pungent
tree which grows at the bottom of Hell).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 241:
Narrated Ibn Al-Musaiyab:
Abu Huraira said, "The Prophet said, 'A prayer performed in congregation is
twenty-five times more superior in reward to a prayer performed by a single
person. The angels of the night and the angels of the day are assembled at
the time of the Fajr (Morning) prayer." Abu Huraira added, "If you wish, you
can recite:-- 'Verily! The recitation of the Qur'an in the early dawn (Morning
prayer) is ever witnessed (attended by the angels of the day and the night).'
(17.78)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 242:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
On the Day of Resurrection the people will fall on their knees and every
nation will follow their prophet and they will say, "O so-and-so! Intercede
(for us with Allah), "till (the right) intercession is given to the Prophet
(Muhammad) and that will be the day when Allah will raise him into a station
of praise and glory (i.e. Al-Maqam -al-Mahmud).
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 243:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever, after listening
to the Adhan (for the prayer) says, 'O Allah, the Lord of this complete call
and of this prayer, which is going to be established! Give Muhammad AlWasila and Al-Fadila and

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 244:
Narrated Abdullah bin Masud:
Allah's Apostle entered Mecca (in the year of the Conquest) and there were
three-hundred and sixty idols around the Ka'ba. He then started hitting
them with a stick in his hand and say: 'Truth (i.e. Islam) has come and
falsehood (disbelief) vanished. Truly falsehood (disbelief) is ever bound to
vanish.' (17.81) 'Truth has come and falsehood (Iblis) can not create
anything.' (34.49)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 245:
Narrated Abdullah:
While I was in the company of the Prophet on a farm and he was reclining on
a palm leave stalk, some Jews passed by. Some of them said to the others.
"Ask him (the Prophet about the spirit." Some of them said, "What urges
you to ask him about it" Others said, "(Don't) lest he should give you a reply
which you dislike." But they said, "Ask him." So they asked him about the
Spirit. The Prophet kept quiet and did not give them any answer. I knew that
he was being divinely inspired so I stayed at my place. When the divine
inspiration had been revealed, the Prophet said. "They ask you (O,
Muhammad) concerning the Spirit, Say: "The spirit," its knowledge is with
my Lord; and of knowledge you (mankind) have been given only a Little."
(17.85)
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 246:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
(regarding): 'Neither say your, prayer aloud, nor say it in a low tone.' (17.110)
This Verse was revealed while Allah's Apostle was hiding himself in Mecca.
When he prayed with his companions, he used to raise his voice with the
recitation of Qur'an, and if the pagans happened to hear him, they would
abuse the Qur'an, the One who revealed it and the one who brought it.
Therefore Allah said to His Prophet : 'Neither say your prayer aloud.' (17.110)
i.e. do not recite aloud lest the pagans should hear you, but follow a way
between.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 247:
Narrated Aisha:
The (above) verse was revealed in connection with the invocations.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 248:
Narrated 'Ali:
That one night Allah's Apostle came to him and Fatima and said, "Don't you
(both offer the (Tahajjud) prayer?" Ali said, 'When Allah wishes us to get up,
we get up." The Prophet then recited: 'But man is more quarrelsome than
anything.' (18.54) (See Hadith No. 227,Vol. 2)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 249:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
I said to Ibn 'Abbas, "Nauf Al-Bikali claims that Moses, the companion of AlKhadir was not the Moses of the children of Israel" Ibn 'Abbas said, "The
enemy of Allah (Nauf) told a lie." Narrated Ubai bin Ka'b that he heard
Allah's Apostle saying, "Moses got up to deliver a speech before the children
of Israel and he was asked, Who is the most learned person among the
people?' Moses replied, 'I (am the most learned).' Allah admonished him for
he did not ascribe knowledge to Allah alone. So Allah revealed to him: 'At
the junction of the two seas there is a slave of Ours who is more learned
than you.' Moses asked, 'O my Lord, how can I meet him?' Allah said, 'Take a
fish and put it in a basket (and set out), and where you, will lose the fish, you
will find him.' So Moses (took a fish and put it in a basket and) set out, along
with his boy-servant Yusha' bin Nun, till they reached a rock (on which) they
both lay their heads and slept. The fish moved vigorously in the basket and
got out of it and fell into the sea and there it took its way through the sea
(straight) as in a tunnel). (18.61) Allah stopped the current of water on both
sides of the way created by the fish, and so that way was like a tunnel. When
Moses got up, his companion forgot to tell him about the fish, and so they
carried on their journey during the rest of the day and the whole night.
The next morning Moses asked his boy-servant 'Bring us our early meal; no
doubt, we have suffered much fatigue in this journey of ours.' (18.62) Moses
did not get tired till he had passed the place which Allah had ordered him to
seek after. His boy-servant then said to him,' 'Do you remember when we
be-took ourselves to the rock I indeed forgot the fish, none but Satan made
me forget to remember it. It took its course into the sea in a marvelous
way.' (18.63)
There was a tunnel for the fish and for Moses and his boy-servant there was
astonishment. Moses said, 'That is what we have been seeking'. So they
went back retracing their footsteps. (18.64) They both returned, retracing
their steps till they reached the rock. Behold ! There they found a man
covered with a garment. Moses greeted him. Al-Khadir said astonishingly. 'Is
there such a greeting in your land?' Moses said, 'I am Moses.' He said, 'Are
you the Moses of the children of Israel?' Moses said, 'I have come to you so
that you may teach me of what you have been taught.
Al-Khadir said, 'You will not be able to have patience with me. (18.66) O
Moses! I have some of Allah's knowledge which He has bestowed upon me
but you do not know it; and you too, have some of Allah's knowledge which
He has bestowed upon you, but I do not know it." Moses said, "Allah willing,
you will find me patient, and I will not disobey you in anything.' (18.6) Al-
Khadir said to him. 'If you then follow me, do not ask me about anything
until I myself speak to you concerning it.' (18.70), After that both of them
proceeded along the sea coast, till a boat passed by and they requested the
crew to let them go on board. The crew recognized Al-Khadir and allowed
them to get on board free of charge. When they got on board suddenly
Moses saw that Al-Khadir had pulled out one of the planks of the boat with
an adze. Moses said to him.' These people gave us a free lift, yet you have
scuttled their boat so as to drown its people! Truly, you have done a
dreadful thing.' (18.71)
Al-Khadir said, 'Didn't I say that you can have no patience with me ?' (18.72)
Moses said, 'Call me not to account for what I forgot and be not hard upon
me for my affair (with you.)" (18.73)
Allah's Apostle said, "The first excuse given by Moses, was that he had
forgotten. Then a sparrow came and sat over the edge of the boat and
dipped its beak once in the sea. Al-Khadir said to Moses, 'My knowledge and
your knowledge, compared to Allah's knowledge is like what this sparrow
has taken out of the sea.' Then they both got out of the boat, and while they
were walking on the sea shore, Al-Khadir saw a boy playing with other boys.
Al-Khadir got hold of the head of that boy and pulled it out with his hands
and killed him. Moses said, 'Have you killed an innocent soul who has killed
nobody! Truly, you have done an illegal thing.' (18.74) He said, "Didn't I tell
you that you can have no patience with me?' (18.75) (The sub narrator said,
the second blame was stronger than the first one.) Moses said, 'If I ask you
about anything after this, keep me not in your company, you have received
an excuse from me.' (18.76)
Then they both proceeded until they came to the inhabitants of a town.
They asked them food but they refused to entertain them. (In that town)
they found there a wall on the point of falling down. (18.77) Al-Khadir set it
up straight with his own hands. Moses said, 'These are people to whom we
came, but they neither fed us nor received us as guests. If you had wished,
you could surely have exacted some recompense for it. Al-Khadir said, 'This
is the parting between me and you ..that is the interpretation of (those
things) over which you were unable to hold patience.' (18.78-82)
Allah's Apostle said, "We wished that Moses could have been more patient
so that Allah might have described to us more about their story."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 250:
Narrated Ibn Juraij:
Ya'la bin Muslim and 'Amr bin Dinar and some others narrated the narration
of Said bin Jubair.
Narrated Said: While we were at the house of Ibn 'Abbas, Ibn 'Abbas said,
"Ask me (any question)" I said, "O Abu Abbas! May Allah let me be sacrificed
for you ! There is a man at Kufa who is a story-teller called Nauf; who claims
that he (Al-Khadir's companion) is not Moses of Bani Israel." As for 'Amr, he
said to me, "Ibn 'Abbas said, "(Nauf) the enemy of Allah told a lie." But Ya'la
said to me, "Ibn 'Abbas said, Ubai bin Ka'b said, Allah's Apostle said, 'Once
Moses, Allah's Apostle, preached to the people till their eyes shed tears and
their hearts became tender, whereupon he finished his sermon. Then a man
came to Moses and asked, 'O Allah's Apostle! Is there anyone on the earth
who is more learned than you?' Moses replied, 'No.' So Allah admonished
him (Moses), for he did not ascribe all knowledge to Allah. It was said, (on
behalf of Allah), 'Yes, (there is a slave of ours who knows more than you ).'
Moses said, 'O my Lord! Where is he?' Allah said, 'At the junction of the two
seas.' Moses said, 'O my Lord ! Tell I me of a sign whereby I will recognize
the place.' " 'Amr said to me, Allah said, "That place will be where the fish
will leave you." Ya'la said to me, "Allah said (to Moses), 'Take a dead fish
(and your goal will be) the place where it will become alive.' " So Moses
took a fish and put it in a basket and said to his boy-servant "I don't want to
trouble you, except that you should inform me as soon as this fish leaves
you." He said (to Moses)." You have not demanded too much." And that is
as mentioned by Allah:
'And (remember) when Moses said to his attendant .... ' (18.60) Yusha' bin
Nun. (Said did not state that). The Prophet said, "While the attendant was in
the shade of the rock at a wet place, the fish slipped out (alive) while Moses
was sleeping. His attend an said (to himself), "I will not wake him, but when
he woke up, he forgot to tell him The fish slipped out and entered the sea.
Allah stopped the flow of the sea. where the fish was, so that its trace
looked as if it was made on a rock. 'Amr forming a hole with his two thumbs
an index fingers, said to me, "Like this, as in its trace was made on a rock."
Moses said "We have suffered much fatigue on this journey of ours." (This
was not narrate by Said). Then they returned back and found Al-Khadir.
'Uthman bin Abi Sulaiman said to me, (they found him) on a green carpet in
the middle of the sea. Al-Khadir was covered with his garment with one end
under his feet and the other end under his head. When Moses greeted, he
uncovered his face and said astonishingly, 'Is there such a greeting in my
land? Who are you?' Moses said, 'I am Moses.' Al-Khadir said, 'Are you the
Moses of Bani Israel?' Moses said, 'Yes.' Al-Khadir said, "What do you want?'
Moses said, ' I came to you so that you may teach me of the truth which you
were taught.' Al-Khadir said, 'Is it not sufficient for you that the Torah is in
your hands and the Divine Inspiration comes to you, O Moses? Verily, I have
a knowledge that you ought not learn, and you have a knowledge which I
ought not learn.' At that time a bird took with its beak (some water) from
the sea: Al-Khadir then said, 'By Allah, my knowledge and your knowledge
besides Allah's Knowledge is like what this bird has taken with its beak from
the sea.' Until, when they went on board the boat (18.71). They found a small
boat which used to carry the people from this sea-side to the other sea-side.
The crew recognized Al-Khadir and said, 'The pious slave of Allah.' (We said
to Said "Was that Khadir?" He said, "Yes.") The boat men said, 'We will not
get him on board with fare.' Al-Khadir scuttled the boat and then plugged
the hole with a piece o wood. Moses said, 'Have you scuttle it in order to
drown these people surely, you have done a dreadful thing. (18.71) (Mujahid
said. "Moses said so protestingly.") Al-Khadir said, didn't I say that you can
have no patience with me?' (18.72) The first inquiry of Moses was done
because of forget fullness, the second caused him to be bound with a
stipulation, and the third was done he intentionally. Moses said, 'Call me not
to account for what I forgot and be not hard upon me for my affair (with
you).' (18.73)
(Then) they found a boy and Al-Khadir killed him. Ya'la- said: Said said 'They
found boys playing and Al-Khadir got hold of a handsome infidel boy laid him
down and then slew him with knife. Moses said, 'Have you killed a innocent
soul who has killed nobody' (18.74) Then they proceeded and found a wall
which was on the point of falling down, and Al-Khadir set it up straight Said
moved his hand thus and said 'Al-Khadir raised his hand and the wall became
straight. Ya'la said, 'I think Said said, 'Al-Khadir touched the wall with his
hand and it became straight (Moses said to Al-Khadir), 'If you had wished,
you could have taken wages for it. Said said, 'Wages that we might had
eaten.' And there was a king in furor (ahead) of them" (18.79) And there was
in front of them. Ibn 'Abbas recited: 'In front of them (was) a king.'
It is said on the authority of somebody other than Said that the king was
Hudad bin Budad. They say that the boy was called Haisur. 'A king who
seized every ship by force. (18.79) So I wished that if that boat passed by
him, he would leave it because of its defect and when they have passed they
would repair it and get benefit from it. Some people said that they closed
that hole with a bottle, and some said with tar. 'His parents were believers,
and he (the boy) was a non-believer and we(Khadir) feared lest he would
oppress them by obstinate rebellion and disbelief.' (18.80) (i.e. that their
love for him would urge them to follow him in his religion, 'so we (Khadir)
desired that their Lord should change him for them for one better in
righteousness and near to mercy' (18:81). This was in reply to Moses' saying:
Have you killed an innocent soul.'? (18.74). 'Near to mercy" means they will
be more merciful to him than they were to the former whom Khadir had
killed. Other than Sa'id, said that they were compensated with a girl. Dawud
bin Abi 'Asim said on the authority of more than one that this next child was
a girl.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 251:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
I said to Ibn 'Abbas, "Nauf-al-Bakali " claims that Moses of Bani Israel was
not Moses, the companion of Al-Khadir." Ibn 'Abbas said, "Allah's enemy
tells a lie! Ubai bin Ka'b narrated to us that Allah's Apostle said, 'Moses got
up to deliver a sermon before Bani Israel and he was asked, 'Who is the
most learned person among the people?' Moses replied, 'I (am the most
learned).' Allah then admonished Moses for he did not ascribe all knowledge
to Allah only (Then) came the Divine Inspiration:-- 'Yes, one of Our slaves at
the junction of the two seas is more learned than you.'
Moses said, 'O my Lord ! How can meet him?' Allah said, 'Take a fish in a
basket and wherever the fish is lost, follow it (you will find him at that
place). So Moses set out along with his attendant Yusha' bin Nun, and they
carried with them a fish till they reached a rock and rested there. Moses put
his head down and slept. (Sufyan, a sub-narrator said that somebody other
than 'Amr said) 'At the rock there was a water spring called 'Al-Hayat' and
none came in touch with its water but became alive. So some of the water
of that spring fell over that fish, so it moved and slipped out of the basket
and entered the sea. When Moses woke up, he asked his attendant, 'Bring
our early meal' (18.62).
The narrator added: Moses did not suffer from fatigue except after he had
passed the place he had been ordered to observe. His attendant Yusha bin
Nun said to him, 'Do you remember (what happened) when we betook
ourselves to the rock? I did indeed forget (about) the fish ...' (18.63) The
narrator added: So they came back, retracing their steps and then they
found in the sea, the way of the fish looking like a tunnel. So there was an
astonishing event for his attendant, and there was tunnel for the fish. When
they reached the rock, they found a man covered with a garment. Moses
greeted him. The man said astonishingly, 'Is there any such greeting in your
land?' Moses said, 'I am Moses.' The man said, 'Moses of Bani Israel?' Moses
said, 'Yes,' and added, 'may I follow you so that you teach me something of
the Knowledge which you have been taught?' (18.66). Al-Khadir said to him,
'O Moses! You have something of Allah's knowledge which Allah has taught
you and which I do not know; and I have something of Allah's knowledge
which Allah has taught me and which you do not know.' Moses said, 'But I
will follow you.' Al-Khadir said, 'Then if you follow me, ask me no question
about anything until I myself speak to you concerning it.' (18.70). After that
both of them proceeded along the seashore. There passed by them a boat
whose crew recognized Al-Khadir and received them on board free of
charge. So they both got on board. A sparrow came and sat on the edge of
the boat and dipped its beak unto the sea. Al-Khadir said to Moses. 'My
knowledge and your knowledge and all the creation's knowledge compared
to Allah's knowledge is not more than the water taken by this sparrow's
beak.'
Then Moses was startled by Al-Khadir's action of taking an adze and
scuttling the boat with it. Moses said to him, 'These people gave us a free
lift, but you intentionally scuttled their boat so as to drown them. Surely you
have...' (18.71) Then they both proceeded and found a boy playing with
other boys. Al-Khadir took hold of him by the head and cut it off. Moses said
to him, 'Have you killed an innocent soul who has killed nobody? Surely you
have done an illegal thing! ' (18.74) He said, "Didn't I tell you that you will not
be able to have patient with me up to ..but they refused to entertain them
as their guests. There they found a wall therein at the point of collapsing.'
(18.75-77) Al-Khadir moved his hand thus and set it upright (repaired it).
Moses said to him, 'When we entered this town, they neither gave us
hospitality nor fed us; if you had wished, you could have taken wages for it,'
Al-Khadir said, 'This is the parting between you and me I will tell you the
interpretation of (those things) about which you were unable to hold
patience.'...(18.78)
Allah's Apostle said, 'We wished that Moses could have been more patient
so that He (Allah) could have described to us more about their story.' Ibn
'Abbas used to recite:-- 'And in front (ahead) of them there was a king who
used to seize every (serviceable) boat by force. (18.79) ...and as for the boy
he was a disbeliever. "

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 252:
Narrated Musab:
I asked my father, "Was the Verse:-- 'Say: (O Muhammad) Shall We tell you
the greatest losers in respect of their deeds?'(18.103) revealed regarding AlHaruriyya?" He said, "No, but regarding the Jews and the Christians, for the
Jews disbelieved Muhammad and the Christians disbelieved in Paradise and
say that there are neither meals nor drinks therein. Al- Hururiyya are those
people who break their pledge to Allah after they have confirmed that they
will fulfill it, and Sad used to call them 'Al-Fasiqin (evildoers who forsake
Allah's obedience).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 253:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "On the Day of Resurrection, a huge fat man will come
who will not weigh, the weight of the wing of a mosquito in Allah's Sight."
and then the Prophet added, 'We shall not give them any weight on the Day
of Resurrection ' (18.105)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 254:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle said, "On the Day of Resurrection Death will be brought
forward in the shape of a black and white ram. Then a call maker will call, 'O
people of Paradise!' Thereupon they will stretch their necks and look
carefully. The caller will say, 'Do you know this?' They will say, 'Yes, this is
Death.' By then all of them will have seen it. Then it will be announced again,
'O people of Hell !' They will stretch their necks and look carefully. The caller
will say, 'Do you know this?' They will say, 'Yes, this is Death.' And by then all
of them will have seen it. Then it (that ram) will be slaughtered and the
caller will say, 'O people of Paradise! Eternity for you and no death O people
of Hell! Eternity for you and no death."' Then the Prophet, recited:-'And warn them of the Day of distress when the case has been decided,
while (now) they are in a state of carelessness (i.e. the people of the world)
and they do not believe.' (19.39)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 255:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet said to Gabriel, "What prevents you from visiting us more often
than you visit us now?" So there was revealed:-'And we (angels) descend not but by the command of your Lord. To Him
belongs what is before us and what is behind us...'(19.64)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 256:
Narrated Khabbab:
I came to Al-'Asi bin Wail As-Sahmi and demanded something which he
owed me. He said, "I will not give you (your money) till you disbelieve in
Muhammad." I said, "No, I shall not disbelieve in Muhammad till you die and
then be resurrected." He said, "Will I die and then be resurrected?" I said,
'Yes'. He said', "Then I will have wealth and children there, and I will pay you
(there)." So this Verse was revealed:-'Have you then seen him who disbelieved in Our Signs and (yet) says: I shall
certainly be given wealth and children? (19.77)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 257:
Narrated Khabbab:
I was a blacksmith in Mecca Once I made a sword for Al-'Asi bin Wail AsSahmi. When I went to demand its price, he said, "I will not give it to you till
you disbelieve in Muhammad." I said, "I shall not disbelieve in Muhammad
till Allah make you die and then bring you to life again." He said, "If Allah
should make me die and then resurrect me and I would have wealth and
children." So Allah revealed:-'Have you seen him who disbelieved in Our Signs, and (yet) says I shall
certainly be given wealth and children? Has he known the unseen or has he
taken a covenant from (Allah) the Beneficent?' (19.77-78)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 258:
Narrated Masruq:
Khabbab said, "During the pre-lslamic period, I was a blacksmith and Al-Asi
bin Wail owed me a debt." So Khabbab went to him to demand the debt. He
said, "I will not give you (your due) till you disbelieve in Muhammad."
Khabbab said, "By Allah, I shall not disbelieve in Muhammad till Allah makes
you die and then resurrects you." Al-Asi said, "So leave me till I die and then
be resurrected, for I will be given wealth and children whereupon I will pay
you your debt." So this Verse was revealed:-'Have you seen him who disbelieved in Our Signs and, (yet) says: I shall
certainly be given wealth and children.' (19.77)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 259:
Narrated Khabbab:
I was a blacksmith and Al-Asi Bin Wail owed me a debt, so I went to him to
demand it. He said to me. "I will not pay you your debt till you disbelieve in
Muhammad." I said, "I will not disbelieve in Muhammad till you die and then
be resurrected." He said, "Will I be resurrected after my death? If so, I shall
pay you (there) if I should find wealth and children." So there was revealed:-'Have you seen him who disbelieved in Our Signs, and yet says: I shall
certainly be given wealth and children? Has he, known to the unseen or has
he taken a covenant from (Allah) the Beneficent? Nay ! We shall record what
he says, and we shall add and add to his punishment. And We shall inherit
from him all that he talks of, and he shall appear before Us alone.' (19.77-80)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 260:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Adam and Moses met, and Moses said to Adam "You
are the one who made people miserable and turned them out of Paradise."
Adam said to him, "You are the one whom Allah selected for His message
and whom He selected for Himself and upon whom He revealed the Torah."
Moses said, 'Yes.' Adam said, "Did you find that written in my fate before my
creation?' Moses said, 'Yes.' So Adam overcame Moses with this argument."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 261:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
When Allah's Apostle arrived at Medina, he found the Jews observing the
fast on the day of 'Ashura' (10th of Muharram). The Prophet asked them
(about it) and they replied, "This is the day when Moses became victorious
over Pharaoh." The Prophet said (to the Muslims), "We are nearer to Moses
than they, so fast on this day."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 262:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Moses argued with Adam and said to him (Adam), 'You
are the one who got the people out of Paradise by your sin, and thus made
them miserable." Adam replied, 'O Moses! You are the one whom Allah
selected for His Message and for His direct talk. Yet you blame me for a
thing which Allah had ordained for me before He created me?." Allah's
Apostle further said, "So Adam overcame Moses by this Argument."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 263:
Narrated Abdullah:
The Suras of Bani Israel, Al-Kahf, Mariyam, Taha and Al-Anbiya are from the
very old Suras which I learnt by heart, and they are my first property.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 264:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet delivered a sermon and said, "You (people) will be gathered
before Allah (on the Day of Resurrection) bare-footed, naked and
uncircumcised." (The Prophet then recited):-- 'As We began the first creation
We shall repeat it. (It is) a promise We have undertaken and truly We shall
do it.' and added, "The first man who will be dressed on the Day of
Resurrection, will be Abraham. Lo! Some men from my followers will be
brought and taken towards the left side, whereupon I will say, 'O Lord,
(these are) my companions!' It will be said, 'You do not know what new
things they introduced (into the religion) after you.' I will then say as the
righteous pious slave, Jesus, said, 'I was a witness over them while I dwelt
among them...(to His Statement)..and You are the Witness to all things.'
(5.117) Then it will be said, '(O Muhammad) These people never stopped to
apostate since you left them."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 265:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said, "On the day of Resurrection Allah will say, 'O Adam!'
Adam will reply, 'Labbaik our Lord, and Sa'daik ' Then there will be a loud
call (saying), Allah orders you to take from among your offspring a mission
for the (Hell) Fire.' Adam will say, 'O Lord! Who are the mission for the (Hell)
Fire?' Allah will say, 'Out of each thousand, take out 999.' At that time every
pregnant female shall drop her load (have a miscarriage) and a child will
have grey hair. And you shall see mankind as in a drunken state, yet not
drunk, but severe will be the torment of Allah." (22.2) (When the Prophet
mentioned this), the people were so distressed (and afraid) that their faces
got changed (in color) whereupon the Prophet said, "From Gog and Magog
nine-hundred ninety-nine will be taken out and one from you. You Muslims
(compared to the large number of other people) will be like a black hair on
the side of a white ox, or a white hair on the side of a black ox, and I hope
that you will be one-fourth of the people of Paradise." On that, we said,
"Allahu-Akbar!" Then he said, "I hope that you will be) one-third of the
people of Paradise." We again said, "Allahu-Akbar!" Then he said, "(I hope
that you will be) one-half of the people of Paradise." So we said, Allahu
Akbar."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 266:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Regarding the Verse: "And among men is he who worships Allah's as it were
on the very edge." (22.11).
A man used to come to Medina as if his wife brought a son and his mares
produces offspring. He would say, "This religion (Islam) is good," but if his
wife did not give birth to a child and his mares produced no offspring, he
would say, "This religion is bad."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 267:
Narrated Qais bin Ubad:
Abu Dharr used to take an oath confirming that the Verse:
'These two opponents (believers, and disbelievers) dispute with each other
about their Lord.' (22.19) was Revealed in connection with Hamza and his
two companions and 'Utbah and his two companions on the day when they
ease out of the battle of Badr.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 268:
Narrated Qais bin Ubad: 'Ali said, "I will be the first to kneel before the
Beneficent on the
'These two opponents (believers and disbelievers dispute with each other
about their Lord,' (22.19) was revealed in connection with those who came
out for the Battle of Badr, i.e. 'Ali, Hamza, 'Ubaida, Shaiba bin Rabi'a, 'Utba
bin Rabi'a and Al-Walid bin Utba.
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 269:
Narrated Sahl bin Saud:
'Uwaimir came to 'Asim bin 'Adi who was the chief of Bani Ajlan and said,
"What do you say about a man who has found another man with his wife?
Should he kill him whereupon you would kill him (i.e. the husband), or what
should he do? Please ask Allah's Apostle about this matter on my behalf."
Asim then went to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! (And asked him
that question) but Allah's Apostle disliked the question," When 'Uwaimir
asked 'Asim (about the Prophet's answer) 'Asim replied that Allah's Apostle
disliked such questions and considered it shameful. "Uwaimir then said, "By
Allah, I will not give up asking unless I ask Allah's Apostle about it." Uwaimir
came (to the Prophet ) and said, "O Allah's Apostle! A man has found
another man with his wife! Should he kill him whereupon you would kill him
(the husband, in Qisas) or what should he do?" Allah's Apostle said, "Allah
has revealed regarding you and your wife's case in the Qur'an "So Allah's
Apostle ordered them to perform the measures of Mula'ana according to
what Allah had mentioned in His Book. So 'Uwaimir did Mula'ana with her
and said, "O Allah's Apostle! If I kept her I would oppress her." So 'Uwaimir
divorced her and so divorce became a tradition after them for those who
happened to be involved in a case of Mula'ana. Allah's Apostle then said,
"Look! If she (Uwaimir's wife) delivers a black child with deep black large
eyes, big hips and fat legs, then I will be of the opinion that 'Uwaimir has
spoken the truth; but if she delivers a red child looking like a Wahra then we
will consider that 'Uwaimir has told a lie against her." Later on she delivered
a child carrying the qualities which Allah's Apostle had mentioned as a proof
for 'Uwaimir's claim; therefore the child was ascribed to its mother
henceforth.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 270:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
A man came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Suppose a man
saw another man with his wife, should he kill him whereupon you might kill
him (i.e. the killer) (in Qisas) or what should he do?" So Allah revealed
concerning their case what is mentioned of the order of Mula'ana. Allah's
Apostle said to the man, "The matter between you and your wife has been
decided." So they did Mula'ana in the presence of Allah's Apostle and I was
present there, and then the man divorced his wife. So it became a tradition
to dissolve the marriage of those spouses who were involved in a case of
Mula'ana. The woman was pregnant and the husband denied that he was
the cause of her pregnancy, so the son was (later) ascribed to her. Then it
became a tradition that such a son would be the heir of his mother, and she
would inherit of him what Allah prescribed for her.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 271:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Hilal bin Umaiya accused his wife of committing illegal sexual intercourse
with Sharik bin Sahma' and filed the case before the Prophet. The Prophet
said (to Hilal), "Either you bring forth a proof (four witnesses) or you will
receive the legal punishment (lashes) on your back." Hilal said, "O Allah's
Apostle! If anyone of us saw a man over his wife, would he go to seek after
witnesses?" The Prophet kept on saying, "Either you bring forth the
witnesses or you will receive the legal punishment (lashes) on your back."
Hilal then said, "By Him Who sent you with the Truth, I am telling the truth
and Allah will reveal to you what will save my back from legal punishment."
Then Gabriel came down and revealed to him:-'As for those who accuse their wives...' (24.6-9) The Prophet recited it till he
reached: '... (her accuser) is telling the truth.' Then the Prophet left and sent
for the woman, and Hilal went (and brought) her and then took the oaths
(confirming the claim). The Prophet was saying, "Allah knows that one of
you is a liar, so will any of you repent?" Then the woman got up and took the
oaths and when she was going to take the fifth one, the people stopped her
and said, "It (the fifth oath) will definitely bring Allah's curse on you (if you
are guilty)." So she hesitated and recoiled (from taking the oath) so much
that we thought that she would withdraw her denial. But then she said, "I
will not dishonor my family all through these days," and carried on (the
process of taking oaths). The Prophet then said, "Watch her; if she delivers a
black-eyed child with big hips and fat shins then it is Sharik bin Sahma's
child." Later she delivered a child of that description. So the Prophet said, "If
the case was not settled by Allah's Law, I would punish her severely."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 272:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
A man accused his wife of illegal sexual intercourse and denied his paternity
to her (conceived) child during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle. Allah's
Apostle ordered them both to do Mula'ana as Allah decreed and then gave
his decision that the child would be for the mother, and a divorce decree
was issued for the couple involved in a case of Mula'ana.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 273:
Narrated 'Aisha:
And as for him among them who had the greater share..' (24.11) was
Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 274:
Narrated Aisha:
(The wife of the Prophet) Whenever Allah's Apostle intended to go on a
journey, he used to draw lots among his wives and would take with him the
one on whom the lot had fallen. Once he drew lots when he wanted to carry
out a Ghazwa, and the lot came upon me. So I proceeded with Allah's
Apostle after Allah's order of veiling (the women) had been revealed and
thus I was carried in my howdah (on a camel) and dismounted while still in
it. We carried on our journey, and when Allah's Apostle had finished his
Ghazwa and returned and we approached Medina, Allah's Apostle ordered
to proceed at night. When the army was ordered to resume the homeward
journey, I got up and walked on till I left the army (camp) behind. When I
had answered the call of nature, I went towards my howdah, but behold ! A
necklace of mine made of Jaz Azfar (a kind of black bead) was broken and I
looked for it and my search for it detained me. The group of people who
used to carry me, came and carried my howdah on to the back of my camel
on which I was riding, considering that I was therein. At that time women
were light in weight and were not fleshy for they used to eat little (food), so
those people did not feel the lightness of the howdah while raising it up, and
I was still a young lady. They drove away the camel and proceeded. Then I
found my necklace after the army had gone. I came to their camp but found
nobody therein so I went to the place where I used to stay, thinking that
they would miss me and come back in my search. While I was sitting at my
place, I felt sleepy and slept. Safwan bin Al-Mu'attil As-Sulami Adh-Dhakwani was behind the army. He had started in the last part of the night and
reached my stationing place in the morning and saw the figure of a sleeping
person. He came to me and recognized me on seeing me for he used to see
me before veiling. I got up because of his saying: "Inna Lillahi wa inna ilaihi
rajiun," which he uttered on recognizing me. I covered my face with my
garment, and by Allah, he did not say to me a single word except, "Inna
Lillahi wa inna ilaihi rajiun," till he made his she-camel kneel down
whereupon he trod on its forelegs and I mounted it. Then Safwan set out,
leading the she-camel that was carrying me, till we met the army while they
were resting during the hot midday. Then whoever was meant for
destruction, fell in destruction, and the leader of the Ifk (forged statement)
was 'Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul. After this we arrived at Medina and I
became ill for one month while the people were spreading the forged
statements of the people of the Ifk, and I was not aware of anything
thereof. But what aroused my doubt while I was sick, was that I was no
longer receiving from Allah's Apostle the same kindness as I used to receive
when I fell sick. Allah's Apostle would enter upon me, say a greeting and
add, "How is that (lady)?" and then depart.
That aroused my suspicion but I was not aware of the propagated evil till I
recovered from my ailment. I went out with Um Mistah to answer the call of
nature towards Al-Manasi, the place where we used to relieve ourselves,
and used not to go out for this purpose except from night to night, and that
was before we had lavatories close to our houses. And this habit of ours was
similar to the habit of the old 'Arabs (in the deserts or in the tents)
concerning the evacuation of the bowels, for we considered it troublesome
and harmful to take lavatories in the houses. So I went out with Um Mistah
who was the daughter of Abi Ruhm bin Abd Manaf, and her mother was
daughter of Sakhr bin Amir who was the aunt of Abi Bakr As-Siddiq, and her
son was Mistah bin Uthatha. When we had finished our affair, Um Mistah
and I came back towards my house. Um Mistah stumbled over her robe
whereupon she said, "Let Mistah be ruined ! " I said to her, "What a bad
word you have said! Do you abuse a man who has taken part in the Battle of
Badr?' She said, "O you there! Didn't you hear what he has said?" I said, "And
what did he say?" She then told me the statement of the people of the Ifk
(forged statement) which added to my ailment. When I returned home,
Allah's Apostle came to me, and after greeting, he said, "How is that (lady)?"
I said, "Will you allow me to go to my parents?" At that time I intended to be
sure of the news through them. Allah's Apostle allowed me and I went to
my parents and asked my mother, "O my mother! What are the people
talking about?" My mother said, "O my daughter! Take it easy, for by Allah,
there is no charming lady who is loved by her husband who has other wives
as well, but that those wives would find fault with her." I said, "Subhan
Allah! Did the people really talk about that?"
That night I kept on weeping the whole night till the morning. My tears
never stopped, nor did I sleep, and morning broke while I was still weeping,
Allah's Apostle called 'Ali bin Abi Talib and Usama bin Zaid when the Divine
Inspiration delayed, in order to consult them as to the idea of divorcing his
wife. Usama bin Zaid told Allah's Apostle of what he knew about the
innocence of his wife and of his affection he kept for her. He said, "O Allah's
Apostle! She is your wife, and we do not know anything about her except
good." But 'Ali bin Abi Talib said, "O Allah's Apostle! Allah does not impose
restrictions on you; and there are plenty of women other than her. If you
however, ask (her) slave girl, she will tell you the truth." 'Aisha added: So
Allah's Apostle called for Barira and said, "O Barira! Did you ever see
anything which might have aroused your suspicion? (as regards Aisha).
Barira said, "By Allah Who has sent you with the truth, I have never seen
anything regarding Aisha which I would blame her for except that she is a
girl of immature age who sometimes sleeps and leaves the dough of her
family unprotected so that the domestic goats come and eat it." So Allah's
Apostle got up (and addressed) the people an asked for somebody who
would take revenge on 'Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul then. Allah's Apostle,
while on the pulpit, said, "O Muslims! Who will help me against a man who
has hurt me by slandering my family? By Allah, I know nothing except good
about my family, and people have blamed a man of whom I know nothing
except good, and he never used to visit my family except with me," Sad bin
Muadh Al-Ansari got up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! By Allah, I will relieve
you from him. If he be from the tribe of (Bani) Al-Aus, then I will chop his
head off; and if he be from our brethren, the Khazraj, then you give us your
order and we will obey it." On that, Sad bin 'Ubada got up, and he was the
chief of the Khazraj, and before this incident he had been a pious man but
he was incited by his zeal for his tribe. He said to Sad (bin Muadh), "By Allah
the Eternal, you have told a lie! You shall not kill him and you will never be
able to kill him!" On that, Usaid bin Hudair, the cousin of Sad (bin Muadh)
got up and said to Sad bin 'Ubada, "You are a liar! By Allah the Eternal, we
will surely kill him; and you are a hypocrite defending the hypocrites!" So the
two tribes of Al-Aus and Al-Khazraj got excited till they were on the point of
fighting with each other while Allah's Apostle was standing on the pulpit.
Allah's Apostle continued quietening them till they became silent
whereupon he became silent too. On that day I kept on weeping so much
that neither did my tears stop, nor could I sleep. In the morning my parents
were with me, and I had wept for two nights and a day without sleeping and
with incessant tears till they thought that my liver would burst with
weeping. While they were with me and I was weeping, an Ansari woman
asked permission to see me. I admitted her and she sat and started weeping
with me. While I was in that state, Allah's Apostle came to us, greeted, and
sat down,. He had never sat with me since the day what was said, was said.
He had stayed a month without receiving any Divine Inspiration concerning
my case. Allah's Apostle recited the Tashahhud after he had sat down, and
then said, "Thereafter, O 'Aisha! I have been informed such and-such a thing
about you; and if you are innocent, Allah will reveal your innocence, and if
you have committed a sin, then ask for Allah's forgiveness and repent to
Him, for when a slave confesses his sin and then repents to Allah, Allah
accepts his repentance." When Allah's Apostle had finished his speech, my
tears ceased completely so that I no longer felt even a drop thereof. Then I
said to my father, "Reply to Allah's Apostle on my behalf as to what he said."
He said, "By Allah, I do not know what to say to Allah's Apostle." Then I said
to my mother, "Reply to Allah's Apostle."
She said, "I do not know what to say to Allah's Apostle." Still a young girl as I
was and though I had little knowledge of Quran, I said, "By Allah, I know
that you heard this story (of the Ifk) so much so that it has been planted in
your minds and you have believed it. So now, if I tell you that I am innocent,
and Allah knows that I am innocent, you will not believe me; and if I confess
something, and Allah knows that I am innocent of it, you will believe me. By
Allah, I cannot find of you an example except that of Joseph's father: "So
(for me) patience is most fitting against that which you assert and it is Allah
(Alone) Whose help can be sought. Then I turned away and lay on my bed,
and at that time I knew that I was innocent and that Allah would reveal my
innocence. But by Allah, I never thought that Allah would sent down about
my affair, Divine Inspiration that would be recited (forever), as I considered
myself too unworthy to be talked of by Allah with something that was to be
recited: but I hoped that Allah's Apostle might have a vision in which Allah
would prove my innocence. By Allah, Allah's Apostle had not left his seat
and nobody had left the house when the Divine Inspiration came to Allah's
Apostle . So there overtook him the same hard condition which used to
overtake him (when he was Divinely Inspired) so that the drops of his sweat
were running down, like pearls, though it was a (cold) winter day, and that
was because of the heaviness of the Statement which was revealed to him.
When that state of Allah's Apostle was over, and he was smiling when he
was relieved, the first word he said was, "Aisha, Allah has declared your
innocence." My mother said to me, "Get up and go to him." I said, "By Allah,
I will not go to him and I will not thank anybody but Allah." So Allah
revealed: "Verily! They who spread the Slander are a gang among you. Think
it not...." (24.11-20).
When Allah revealed this to confirm my innocence, Abu Bakr As-Siddiq who
used to provide for Mistah bin Uthatha because of the latter's kinship to him
and his poverty, said, "By Allah, I will never provide for Mistah anything after
what he has said about Aisha". So Allah revealed:
"Let not those among you who are good and are wealthy swear not to give
(help) to their kinsmen, those in need, and those who have left their homes
for Allah's Cause. Let them Pardon and forgive (i.e. do not punish them). Do
you not love that should forgive you? Verily Allah is Oft-forgiving. Most
Merciful." (24.22)
Abu Bakr said, "Yes, by Allah, I wish that Allah should forgive me." So he
resumed giving Mistah the aid he used to give him before and said, "By
Allah, I will never withold it from him at all." Aisha further said: Allah's
Apostle also asked Zainab bint Jahsh about my case. He said, "O Zainab!
What have you seen?" She replied, "O Allah's Apostle! I protect my hearing
and my sight (by refraining from telling lies). I know nothing but good
(about Aisha)." Of all the wives of Allah's Apostle, it was Zainab who aspired
to receive from him the same favor as I used to receive, yet, Allah saved her
(from telling lies) because of her piety. But her sister, Hamna, kept on
fighting on her behalf so she was destroyed as were those who invented
and spread the slander.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 275:
Narrated Um Ruman:
Aisha's mother, When 'Aisha was accused, she fell down Unconscious.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 276:
Narrated Ibn Abi Mulaika:
I heard 'Aisha reciting: "When you invented a lie (and carry it) on your
tongues." (24.15)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 277:
Narrated Ibn Abu Mulaika:
Ibn 'Abbas asked permission to visit Aisha before her death, and at that time
she was in a state of agony. She then said. "I am afraid that he will praise me
too much." And then it was said to her, "He is the cousin of Allah's Apostle
and one of the prominent Muslims." Then she said, "Allow him to enter."
(When he entered) he said, "How are you?" She replied, "I am Alright if I fear
(Allah)." Ibn Abbas said, "Allah willing, you are Alright as you are the wife of
Allah's Apostle and he did not marry any virgin except you and proof of your
innocence was revealed from the Heaven." Later on Ibn Az-Zubair entered
after him and 'Aisha said to him, "Ibn 'Abbas came to me and praised me
greatly, but I wish that I was a thing forgotten and out of sight."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 278:
Narrated Al-Qasim:
Ibn 'Abbas asked 'Aisha's permission to enter. Al-Qasim then narrated the
whole Hadith (as in 277) but did not mention: "Would that I had been
forgotten and out of sight."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 279:
Narrated Masruq:
'Aisha said that Hassan bin Thabit came and asked permission to visit her. I
said, "How do you permit such a person?" She said, "Hasn't he received a
severely penalty?" (Sufyan, the subnarrator, said: She meant the loss of his
sight.) Thereupon Hassan said the following poetic verse:
"A chaste pious woman who arouses no suspicion. She never talks about
chaste heedless women behind their backs.' On that she said, "But you are
not so."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 280:
Narrated Masruq:
Hassan came to Aisha and said the following poetic Verse: 'A chaste pious
woman who arouses no suspicion. She never talks against chaste heedless
women behind their backs.' 'Aisha said, "But you are not," I said (to 'Aisha),
"Why do you allow such a person to enter upon you after Allah has revealed:
"...and as for him among them who had the greater share therein'?" (24.11)
She said, "What punishment is worse than blindness?" She added, "And he
used to defend Allah's Apostle against the pagans (in his poetry).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 281:
Narrated Aisha:
When there was said about me what was said which I myself was unaware
of, Allah's Apostle got up and addressed the people. He recited Tashah-hud,
and after glorifying and praising Allah as He deserved, he said, "To proceed:
O people Give me your opinion regarding those people who made a forged
story against my wife. By Allah, I do not know anything bad about her. By
Allah, they accused her of being with a man about whom I have never
known anything bad, and he never entered my house unless I was present
there, and whenever I went on a journey, he went with me." Sad bin Mu'adh
got up and said, "O Allah's Apostle Allow me to chop their heads off" Then a
man from the Al-Khazraj (Sa'd bin 'Ubada) to whom the mother of (the
poet) Hassan bin Thabit was a relative, got up and said (to Sad bin Mu'adh),
"You have told a lie! By Allah, if those persons were from the Aus Tribe, you
would not like to chop their heads off." It was probable that some evil
would take place between the Aus and the Khazraj in the mosque, and I was
unaware of all that. In the evening of that day, I went out for some of my
needs (i.e. to relieve myself), and Um Mistah was accompanying me. On our
return, Um Mistah stumbled and said, "Let Mistah. be ruined" I said to her,
"O mother Why do you abuse your Son" On that Um Mistah became silent
for a while, and stumbling again, she said, "Let Mistah be ruined" I said to
her, "Why do you abuse your son?" She stumbled for the third time and said,
"Let Mistah be ruined" whereupon I rebuked her for that. She said, "By
Allah, I do not abuse him except because of you." I asked her, "Concerning
what of my affairs?" So she disclosed the whole story to me. I said, "Has this
really happened?" She replied, "Yes, by Allah." I returned to my house,
astonished (and distressed) that I did not know for what purpose I had gone
out. Then I became sick (fever) and said to Allah's Apostle "Send me to my
father's house." So he sent a slave with me, and when I entered the house, I
found Um Rum-an (my mother) downstairs while (my father) Abu Bakr was
reciting something upstairs. My mother asked, "What has brought you, O
(my) daughter?" I informed her and mentioned to her the whole story, but
she did not feel it as I did. She said, "O my daughter! Take it easy, for there is
never a charming lady loved by her husband who has other wives but that
they feel jealous of her and speak badly of her." But she did not feel the
news as I did. I asked (her), "Does my father know about it?" She said, "yes"
I asked, Does Allah's Apostle know about it too?" She said, "Yes, Allah's
Apostle does too." So the tears filled my eyes and I wept. Abu Bakr, who
was reading upstairs heard my voice and came down and asked my mother,
"What is the matter with her? " She said, "She has heard what has been said
about her (as regards the story of Al-lfk)." On that Abu- Bakr wept and said,
"I beseech you by Allah, O my daughter, to go back to your home" I went
back to my home and Allah's Apostle had come to my house and asked my
maid-servant about me (my character). The maid-servant said, "By Allah, I do
not know of any defect in her character except that she sleeps and let the
sheep enter (her house) and eat her dough." On that, some of the Prophet's
companions spoke harshly to her and said, "Tell the truth to Allah's
Apostle." Finally they told her of the affair (of the slander). She said,
"Subhan Allah! By Allah, I know nothing against her except what goldsmith
knows about a piece of pure gold." Then this news reached the man who
was accused, and he said, "Subhan Allah! By Allah, I have never uncovered
the private parts of any woman." Later that man was martyred in Allah's
Cause. Next morning my parents came to pay me a visit and they stayed
with me till Allah's Apostle came to me after he had offered the Asr prayer.
He came to me while my parents were sitting around me on my right and my
left. He praised and glorified Allah and said, "Now then O 'Aisha! If you have
committed a bad deed or you have wronged (yourself), then repent to Allah
as Allah accepts the repentance from his slaves." An Al-Ansari woman had
come and was sitting near the gate. I said (to the Prophet). "Isn't it
improper that you speak in such a way in the presence of this lady? Allah's
Apostle then gave a piece of advice and I turned to my father and requested
him to answer him (on my behalf). My father said, "What should I say?" Then
I turned to my mother and asked her to answer him. She said, "What should
I say?" When my parents did not give a reply to the Prophet, I said, "I testify
that none has the right to be worshipped except Allah, and that Muhammad
is His Apostle!" And after praising and glorifying Allah as He deserves, I said,
"Now then, by Allah, if I were to tell you that I have not done (this evil
action) and Allah is a witness that I am telling the truth, that would not be of
any use to me on your part because you (people) have spoken about it and
your hearts have absorbed it; and if I were to tell you that I have done this
sin and Allah knows that I have not done it, then you will say, 'She has
confessed herself guilty." By Allah, 'I do not see a suitable example for me
and you but the example of (I tried to remember Jacob's name but couldn't)
Joseph's father when he said; So (for me) "Patience is most fitting against
that which you assert. It is Allah (alone) whose help can be sought.' At that
very hour the Divine Inspiration came to Allah's Apostle and we remained
silent. Then the Inspiration was over and I noticed the signs of happiness on
his face while he was removing (the sweat) from his forehead and saying,
"Have the good tidings O ' "Aisha! Allah has revealed your innocence." At
that time I was extremely angry. My parents said to me. "Get up and go to
him." I said, "By Allah, I will not do it and will not thank him nor thank either
of you, but I will thank Allah Who has revealed my innocence. You have
heard this story but neither did not deny it nor change it (to defend me),"
(Aisha used to say:) "But as regards Zainab bint Jahsh, (the Prophet's wife),
Allah protected her because of her piety, so she did not say anything except
good (about me), but her sister, Hamna, was ruined among those who were
ruined. Those who used to speak evil about me were Mistah, Hassan bin
Thabit, and the hypocrite, Abdullah bin Ubai, who used to spread that news
and tempt others to speak of it, and it was he and Hamna who had the
greater share therein. Abu Bakr took an oath that he would never do any
favor to Mistah at all. Then Allah revealed the Divine Verse:-"Let not those among you who are good and wealthy (i.e. Abu Bakr) swear
not to give (any sort of help) to their kinsmen, and those in need, (i.e.
Mistah) ...Do you not love that Allah should forgive you? And Allah if OftForgiving, Most Merciful." (24.22)
On that, Abu Bakr said, "Yes, by Allah, O our Lord! We wish that You should
forgive us." So Abu Bakr again started giving to Mistah the expenditure
which he used to give him before.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 282:
Narrated Safiya bint Shaiba:
'Aisha used to say: "When (the Verse): "They should draw their veils over
their necks and bosoms," was revealed, (the ladies) cut their waist sheets at
the edges and covered their faces with the cut pieces."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 283:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
A man said, "O Allah's Prophet! Will Allah gather the non-believers on their
faces on the Day of Resurrection?" He said, "Will not the One Who made him
walk on his feet in this world, be able to make him walk on his face on the
Day of Resurrection?" (Qatada, a subnarrator, said: Yes, By the Power of Our
Lord!)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 284:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
I or somebody, asked Allah's Apostle "Which is the biggest sin in the Sight of
Allah?" He said, "That you set up a rival (in worship) to Allah though He
Alone created you." I asked, "What is next?" He said, "Then, that you kill
your son, being afraid that he may share your meals with you." I asked,
"What is next?" He said, "That you commit illegal sexual intercourse with the
wife of your neighbor." Then the following Verse was revealed to confirm
the statement of Allah's Apostle:
"Those who invoke not with Allah, any other god, nor kill life as Allah has
forbidden except for just cause, nor commit illegal sexual intercourse."
(25.68)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 285:
Narrated Al-Qasim bin Abi Bazza:
That he asked Said bin Jubair, "Is there any repentance of the one who has
murdered a believer intentionally?" Then I recited to him:-"Nor kill such life as Allah has forbidden except for a just cause." Said said, "I
recited this very Verse before Ibn 'Abbas as you have recited it before me.
Ibn 'Abbas said, 'This Verse was revealed in Mecca and it has been
abrogated by a Verse in Surat-An-Nisa which was later revealed in Medina."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 286:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
The people of Kufa differed as regards the killing of a believer so I entered
upon Ibn 'Abbas (and asked him) about that. Ibn 'Abbas said, "The Verse (in
Surat-An-Nisa', 4:93) was the last thing revealed in this respect and nothing
cancelled its validity."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 287:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
I asked Ibn 'Abbas about Allah's saying:-'.. this reward is Hell Fire.' (4.93) He said, "No repentance is accepted from
him (i.e. the murderer of a believer)." I asked him regarding the saying of
Allah:
'Those who invoke not with Allah any other god.' ...(25.68)
He said, "This Verse was revealed concerning the pagans of the pre-lslamic
period."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 288:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
Ibn Abza said to me, "Ask Ibn 'Abbas regarding the Statement of Allah:
'And whoever murders a believer intentionally, his recompense is Hell.'
(4.69)
And also His Statement: '...nor kill such life as Allah has forbidden, except for
a just cause .....except those who repent, believe, and do good deeds.' "
(25.68-70) So I asked Ibn 'Abbas and he said, "When this (25.68-69) was
revealed, the people of Mecca said, "We have invoked other gods with
Allah, and we have murdered such lives which Allah has made sacred, and
we have committed illegal sexual intercourse. So Allah revealed:
'Except those who repent, believe, and do good deeds and Allah is OftForgiving, Most Merciful.' (25.70)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 289:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
Abdur-Rahman bin Abza ordered me to ask Ibn 'Abbas regarding the two
Verses (the first of which was ):
"And whosoever murders a believer intentionally." (4.93) So I asked him,
and he said, "Nothing has abrogated this Verse." About (the other Verse):
'And those who invoke not with Allah any other god.' he said, "It was
revealed concerning the pagans,'

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 290:
Narrated Abdullah
Five (great events) have passed: the Smoke, the Moon, the Romans, the
Mighty grasp and the constant Punishment which occurs in 'So the torment
will be yours forever.' (25.77)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 291:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "On the Day of Resurrection Abraham will see his father
covered with Qatara and Ghabara. (i.e. having a dark face)."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 292:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, Abraham will meet his father (on the Day of Resurrection)
and will say, 'O my Lords You promised me that You would not let me in
disgrace on the Day when people will be resurrected.' Allah will say, 'I have
forbidden Paradise to the non-believers."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 293:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
When the Verse:--'And warn your tribe of near-kindred, was revealed, the
Prophet ascended the Safa (mountain) and started calling, "O Bani Fihr! O
Bani 'Adi!" addressing various tribes of Quraish till they were assembled.
Those who could not come themselves, sent their messengers to see what
was there. Abu Lahab and other people from Quraish came and the Prophet
then said, "Suppose I told you that there is an (enemy) cavalry in the valley
intending to attack you, would you believe me?" They said, "Yes, for we
have not found you telling anything other than the truth." He then said, "I
am a warner to you in face of a terrific punishment." Abu Lahab said (to the
Prophet) "May your hands perish all this day. Is it for this purpose you have
gathered us?" Then it was revealed: "Perish the hands of Abu Lahab (one of
the Prophet's uncles), and perish he! His wealth and his children will not
profit him...." (111.1-5)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 294:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle got up when the Verse:--'And warn your tribe of near
kindred...." (26.214) was revealed and said, "O Quraish people! (or he said a
similar word) Buy yourselves! I cannot save you from Allah (if you disobey
Him) O Bani Abu Manaf! I cannot save you from Allah (if you disobey Him). O
'Abbas! The son of 'Abdul Muttalib! I cannot save you from Allah (if you
disobey Him) O Safiya, (the aunt of Allah's Apostle) I cannot save you from
Allah (if you disobey Him). O Fatima, the daughter of Muhammad ! Ask what
you wish from my property, but I cannot save you from Allah (if you disobey
Him)."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 295:
Narrated Al-Musaiyab:
When Abu Talib was on his death bed, Allah's Apostle came to him and
found with him, Abu Jahl and Abdullah bin Abi Umaiya bin Al-Mughira.
Allah's Apostle said, "O uncle! Say: None has the right to be worshipped
except Allah, a sentence with which I will defend you before Allah." On that
Abu Jahl and 'Abdullah bin Abi Umaiya said to Abu Talib, "Will you now leave
the religion of 'Abdul Muttalib?" Allah's Apostle kept on inviting him to say
that sentence while the other two kept on repeating their sentence before
him till Abu Talib said as the last thing he said to them, "I am on the religion
of 'Abdul Muttalib," and refused to say: None has the right to be
worshipped except Allah. On that Allah's Apostle said, "By Allah, I will keep
on asking Allah's forgiveness for you unless I am forbidden (by Allah) to do
so." So Allah revealed:-'It is not fitting for the Prophet and those who believe that they should
invoke (Allah) for forgiveness for pagans.' (9.113) And then Allah revealed
especially about Abu Talib:--'Verily! You (O, Muhammad) guide not whom
you like, but Allah guides whom He will.' (28.56)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 296:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
'...will bring you home' means to Mecca.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 297:
Narrated Masruq:
While a man was delivering a speech in the tribe of Kinda, he said, "Smoke
will prevail on the Day of Resurrection and will deprive the hypocrites their
faculties of hearing and seeing. The believers will be afflicted with
something like cold only thereof." That news scared us, so I went to
(Abdullah) Ibn Mas'ud while he was reclining (and told him the story)
whereupon he became angry, sat up and said, "He who knows a thing can
say, it, but if he does not know, he should say, 'Allah knows best,' for it is an
aspect of knowledge to say, 'I do not know,' if you do not know a certain
thing. Allah said to His prophet. 'Say (O Muhammad): No wage do I ask of
you for this (Qur'an), nor I am one of the pretenders (a person who
pretends things which do not exist.)' (38.86)
The Qur'aish delayed in embracing Islam for a period, so the Prophet
invoked evil on them, saying, 'O Allah! Help me against them by sending
seven years of (famine) like those of Joseph.' So they were afflicted with
such a severe year of famine that they were destroyed therein and ate dead
animals and bones. They started seeing something like smoke between the
sky and the earth (because of severe hunger). Abu Sufyan then came (to the
Prophet) and said, "O Muhammad! You came to order us for to keep good
relations with Kith and kin, and your kinsmen have now perished, so please
invoke Allah (to relieve them).' Then Ibn Mas'ud recited:-- 'Then watch you
for the day that the sky will bring forth a kind of smoke plainly visible....but
truly you will return! (to disbelief) (44.10-15)
Ibn Mas'ud added, Then the punishment was stopped, but truly, they
reverted to heathenism (their old way). So Allah (threatened them thus):
'On the day when we shall seize you with a mighty grasp.' (44.16) And that
was the day of the Battle of Badr. Allah's saying- "Lizama" (the punishment)
refers to the day of Badr Allah's Statement:
'Alif-Lam-Mim, the Romans have been defeated, and they, after their defeat,
will be victorious,' (30.1-3) (This verse): Indicates that the defeat of
Byzantine has already passed.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 298:
Narrated Abu- Huraira: Allah's Apostle said, "No child is born except on AlFitra (Islam) and then his parents make him Jewish, Christian or Magian, as
an animal produces a perfect young animal: do you see any part of its body
amputated?" Then he rec
'The religion of pure Islamic Faith (Hanifa),(i.e. to worship none but Allah),
The pure Allah's Islamic nature with which He (Allah) has created mankind.
Let There be no change in Allah's religion (i.e. to join none in Allah's
worship). That is the straight religion; but most of men know not..." (30.30)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 299:
Narrated Abdullah:
When there was revealed: 'It is those who believe and confuse not their
beliefs with wrong.' (6.82) It was very hard for the companions of Allah's
Apostle, so they said, "Which of us has not confused his belief with wrong?"
Allah's Apostle said, "The Verse does not mean this. Don't you hear
Luqman's statement to his son: 'Verily! Joining others in worship, with Allah
is a great wrong indeed.' (31.13)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 300:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
One day while Allah's Apostle was sitting with the people, a man came to
him walking and said, "O Allah's Apostle. What is Belief?" The Prophet said,
"Belief is to believe in Allah, His Angels, His Books, His Apostles, and the
meeting with Him, and to believe in the Resurrection." The man asked, "O
Allah's Apostle What is Islam?" The Prophet replied, "Islam is to worship
Allah and not worship anything besides Him, to offer prayers perfectly, to
pay the (compulsory) charity i.e. Zakat and to fast the month of Ramadan."
The man again asked, "O Allah's Apostle What is Ihsan (i.e. perfection or
Benevolence)?" The Prophet said, "Ihsan is to worship Allah as if you see
Him, and if you do not achieve this state of devotion, then (take it for
granted that) Allah sees you." The man further asked, "O Allah's Apostle
When will the Hour be established?"
The Prophet replied, "The one who is asked about it does not know more
than the questioner does, but I will describe to you its portents. When the
lady slave gives birth to her mistress, that will be of its portents; when the
bare-footed naked people become the chiefs of the people, that will be of
its portents. The Hour is one of five things which nobody knows except
Allah. Verily, the knowledge of the Hour is with Allah (alone). He sends down
the rain, and knows that which is in the wombs." (31.34) Then the man left.
The Prophet said, "Call him back to me." They went to call him back but
could not see him. The Prophet said, "That was Gabriel who came to teach
the people their religion." (See Hadith No. 47 Vol 1)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 301:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
The Prophet said, "The keys of the Unseen are five." And then he recited:
'Verily, the knowledge of the Hour is with Allah (alone).' (31.34)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 302:
Narrated Abu Huraira: Allah's Apostle said, "Allah said, 'I have prepared for
my pious worshipers such things as no eye has ever seen, no ear has ever
heard of, and nobody has ever thought of." Abu Huraira added: If you wish
you can read:-- 'No soul

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 303:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet, said, "Allah said, 'I have prepared for My pious worshipers such
things as no eye has ever seen, no ear has ever heard of, and nobody has
ever thought of. All that is reserved, besides which, all that you have seen, is
nothing." Then he recited:-'No soul knows what is kept hidden (in reserve) for them of joy as a reward
for what they used to do.' (32.17)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 304:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "There is no believer but I, of all the people, I am the
closest to him both in this world and in the Hereafter. Recite if you wish:
'The Prophet is closer to the believers than their own selves.' (33.6) so if a
believer (dies) leaves some property then his relatives will inherit that
property; but if he is in debt or he leaves poor children, let those (creditors
and children) come to me (that I may pay the debt and provide for the
children), for them I am his sponsor (surely).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 305:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
We used not to call Zaid bin Haritha the freed slave of Allah's Apostle except
Zaid bin Muhammad till the Qu'anic Verse was revealed: "Call them
(adopted sons) by (the names of) their fathers. That is more than just in the
Sight of Allah." (33.5)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 306:
Narrated Anas:
We think that the Verse: 'Among the Believers are men who have been true
to their covenant with Allah.' was revealed in favor of Anas bin An-Nadir.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 307:
Narrated Zaid bin Thabit:
When we collected the fragramentary manuscripts of the Qur'an into
copies, I missed one of the Verses of Surat al-Ahzab which I used to hear
Allah's Apostle reading. Finally I did not find it with anybody except
Khuzaima Al-Ansari, whose witness was considered by Allah's Apostle equal
to the witness of two men. (And that Verse was:)
'Among the believers are men who have been true to their covenant with
Allah.'

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 308:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle came to me when Allah ordered
him to give option to his wives. So Allah's Apostle started with me, saying, "I
am going to mention to you something but you should not hasten (to give
your reply) unless you consult your parents.' He knew that my parents
would not order me to leave him. Then he said, "Allah says:-"O Prophet! Say to your wives..." (33.28-29)
On that I said to him, "Then why should I consult my parents? Verily, I seek
Allah, His Apostle and the Home of the Hereafter.
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 309:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) when Allah's Apostle was ordered to give option
to his wives, he started with me, saying, "I am going to mention to you
something, but you shall not hasten (to give your reply) unless you consult
your parents." The Prophet knew that my parents would not order me to
leave him. Then he said, "Allah says: 'O Prophet (Muhammad)! Say to your
wives: If you desire the life of this world and its glitter........a great reward."
(33.28-29) I said, "Then why I consult my parents? Verily, I seek Allah, His
Apostle and the Home of the Hereafter." Then all the other wives of the
Prophet did the same as I did.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 310:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Verse: 'But you did hide in your mind that which Allah was about to
make manifest.' (33.37) was revealed concerning Zainab bint Jahsh and Zaid
bin Haritha.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 311:
Narrated Aisha:
I used to look down upon those ladies who had given themselves to Allah's
Apostle and I used to say, "Can a lady give herself (to a man)?" But when
Allah revealed: "You (O Muhammad) can postpone (the turn of) whom you
will of them (your wives), and you may receive any of them whom you will;
and there is no blame on you if you invite one whose turn you have set aside
(temporarily).' (33.51) I said (to the Prophet), "I feel that your Lord hastens
in fulfilling your wishes and desires."
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 312:
Narrated Muadha:
'Aisha said, "Allah's Apostle used to take the permission of that wife with
whom he was supposed to stay overnight if he wanted to go to one other
than her, after this Verse was revealed:-"You (O Muhammad) can postpone (the turn of) whom you will of them
(your wives) and you may receive any (of them) whom you will; and there is
no blame on you if you invite one whose turn you have set aside
(temporarily). (33.51) I asked Aisha, "What did you use to say (in this case)?"
She said, "I used to say to him, "If I could deny you the permission (to go to
your other wives) I would not allow your favor to be bestowed on any other
person."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 313:
Narrated Umar: I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Good and bad persons enter upon
you, so I suggest that you order the mothers of the Believers (i.e. your
wives) to observe veils." Then Allah revealed the Verses of Al-Hijab.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 314:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
When Allah's Apostle married Zainab bint Jahsh, he invited the people to a
meal. They took the meal and remained sitting and talking. Then the
Prophet (showed them) as if he is ready to get up, yet they did not get up.
When he noticed that (there was no response to his movement), he got up,
and the others too, got up except three persons who kept on sitting. The
Prophet came back in order to enter his house, but he went away again.
Then they left, whereupon I set out and went to the Prophet to tell him that
they had departed, so he came and entered his house. I wanted to enter
along with him, but he put a screen between me and him. Then Allah
revealed:
'O you who believe! Do not enter the houses of the Prophet...' (33.53)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 315:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
I of all the people know best this verse of Al-Hijab. When Allah's Apostle
married Zainab bint Jahsh she was with him in the house and he prepared a
meal and invited the people (to it). They sat down (after finishing their meal)
and started chatting. So the Prophet went out and then returned several
times while they were still sitting and talking. So Allah revealed the Verse:
'O you who believe! Enter not the Prophet's houses until leave is given to
you for a meal, (and then) not (so early as) to wait for its preparation .....ask
them from behind a screen.' (33.53) So the screen was set up and the people
went away.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 316:
Narrated Anas:
A banquet of bread and meat was held on the occasion of the marriage of
the Prophet to Zainab bint Jahsh. I was sent to invite the people (to the
banquet), and so the people started coming (in groups); They would eat and
then leave. Another batch would come, eat and leave. So I kept on inviting
the people till I found nobody to invite. Then I said, "O Allah's Prophet! I do
not find anybody to invite." He said, "Carry away the remaining food." Then
a batch of three persons stayed in the house chatting. The Prophet left and
went towards the dwelling place of Aisha and said, "Peace and Allah's Mercy
be on you, O the people of the house!" She replied, "Peace and the mercy of
Allah be on you too. How did you find your wife? May Allah bless you. Then
he went to the dwelling places of all his other wives and said to them the
same as he said to Aisha and they said to him the same as Aisha had said to
him. Then the Prophet returned and found a group of three persons still in
the house chatting. The Prophet was a very shy person, so he went out (for
the second time) and went towards the dwelling place of 'Aisha. I do not
remember whether I informed him that the people have gone away. So he
returned and as soon as he entered the gate, he drew the curtain between
me and him, and then the Verse of Al-Hijab was revealed.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 317:
Narrated Anas:
When Allah's Apostle married Zainab bint Jahsh, he made the people eat
meat and bread to their fill (by giving a Walima banquet). Then he went out
to the dwelling places of the mothers of the believers (his wives), as he used
to do in the morning of his marriage. He would greet them and invoke good
on them, and they (too) would return his greeting and invoke good on him.
When he returned to his house, he found two men talking to each other;
and when he saw them, he went out of his house again. When those two
men saw Allah's Apostle: going out of his house, they quickly got up (and
departed). I do not remember whether I informed him of their departure, or
he was informed (by somebody else). So he returned, and when he entered
the house, he lowered the curtain between me and him. Then the Verse of
Al-Hijab was revealed.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 318:
Narrated Aisha:
Sauda (the wife of the Prophet) went out to answer the call of nature after
it was made obligatory (for all the Muslims ladies) to observe the veil. She
was a fat huge lady, and everybody who knew her before could recognize
her. So 'Umar bin Al-Khattab saw her and said, "O Sauda! By Allah, you
cannot hide yourself from us, so think of a way by which you should not be
recognized on going out. Sauda returned while Allah's Apostle was in my
house taking his supper and a bone covered with meat was in his hand. She
entered and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I went out to answer the call of nature
and 'Umar said to me so-and-so." Then Allah inspired him (the Prophet) and
when the state of inspiration was over and the bone was still in his hand as
he had not put in down, he said (to Sauda), "You (women) have been
allowed to go out for your needs."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 319:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Aflah, the brother of Abi Al-Quais, asked permission to visit me after the
order of Al-Hijab was revealed. I said, "I will not permit him unless I take
permission of the Prophet about him for it was not the brother of Abi AlQu'ais but the wife of Abi Al-Qu'ais that nursed me." The Prophet entered
upon me, and I said to him, "O Allah's Apostle! Allah, the brother of Abi AlQu'ais asked permission to visit me but I refused to permit him unless I took
your permission." The Prophet said, "What stopped you from permitting
him? He is your uncle." I said, "O Allah's Apostle! The man was not the
person who had nursed me, but the woman, the wife of Abi Al-Qu'ais had
nursed me." He said, "Admit him, for he is your uncle. Taribat Yaminuki (may
your right hand be saved)" 'Urwa, the sub-narrator added: For that 'Aisha
used to say, "Consider those things which are illegal because of blood
relations as illegal because of the corresponding foster relations."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 320:
Narrated Ka'b bin Ujra:
It was said, "O Allah's Apostle! We know how to greet you, but how to
invoke Allah for you?" The Prophet said, "Say: Allahumma salli ala
Muhammadin wa'ala Ali Muhammaddin, kama sallaita 'ala all Ibrahim, innaka
Hamidun Majid."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 321:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
We said, "O Allah's Apostle! (We know) this greeting (to you) but how shall
we invoke Allah for you?" He said, "Say! Allahumma salli ala Muhammadin
'Abdika wa rasulika kama- sallaita 'ala all Ibrahim wa barik ala Muhammadin
wa'ala all Muhammadin kama barakta 'ala all Ibrahim.' Al-Laith said: 'Ala
Muhammadin wa 'ala all Muhammadin kama barakta ala all Ibrahim.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 322:
Narrated Ibn Abi Hazim and Ad-Darawardi:
Yazid said, "Kama sallaita ala Ibrahima wa barik 'ala Muhammad in wa all
Muhammadin kama barakta 'ala Abrahima wa all Ibrahim."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 323:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Moses was a shy man, and that is what the Statement
of Allah means:
'O you who believe Be not like those who annoyed Moses, but Allah proved
his innocence of that which they alleged and he was honorable in Allah's
Sight.' (33.69)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 324:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Prophet said, "When Allah decrees some order in the heaven, the
angels flutter their wings indicating complete surrender to His saying which
sounds like chains being dragged on rock. And when the state of fear
disappears, they ask each other, "What has your Lord ordered? They say that
He has said that which is true and just, and He is the Most High, the Most
Great." (34.23). Then the stealthy listeners (devils) hear this order, and these
stealthy listeners are like this, one over the other." (Sufyan, a sub-narrator
demonstrated that by holding his hand upright and separating the fingers.)
A stealthy listener hears a word which he will convey to that which is below
him and the second will convey it to that which is below him till the last of
them will convey it to the wizard or foreteller. Sometimes a flame (fire) may
strike the devil before he can convey it, and sometimes he may convey it
before the flame (fire) strikes him, whereupon the wizard adds to that word
a hundred lies. The people will then say, 'Didn't he (i.e. magician) tell suchand-such a thing on such-and-such date?' So that magician is said to have
told the truth because of the Statement which has been heard from the
heavens."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 325:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
One day the Prophet ascended Safa mountain and said, "Oh Sabah! " All the
Quraish gathered round him and said, "What is the matter?" He said, Look, if
I told you that an enemy is going to attack you in the morning or in the
evening, would you not believe me?" They said, "Yes, we will believe you."
He said, "I am a warner to you in face of a terrible punishment." On that Abu
Lahab said, "May you perish ! Is it for this thing that you have gathered us?"
So Allah revealed:
'Perish the hands of Abu Lahab!...' (111.1)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 326:
Narrated Abu Dharr:
Once I was with the Prophet in the mosque at the time of sunset. The
Prophet said, "O Abu Dharr! Do you know where the sun sets?" I replied,
"Allah and His Apostle know best." He said, "It goes and prostrates
underneath (Allah's) Throne; and that is Allah's Statement:-'And the sun runs on its fixed course for a term (decreed). And that is the
decree of All-Mighty, the All-Knowing....' (36.38)
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 327:
Narrated Abu Dharr:
I asked the Prophet about the Statement of Allah:-'And the sun runs on fixed course for a term (decreed), ' (36.38) He said, "Its
course is underneath "Allah's Throne." (Prostration of Sun trees, stars.
mentioned in Qur'an and Hadith does not mean like our prostration but it
means that these objects are obedient to their Creator (Allah) and they obey
for what they have been created for).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 328:
Narrated Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "Nobody has the right to be better than (Jonah) bin
Matta."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 329:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "He who says that I am better than Jonah bin Matta, tells
a lie.'

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 330:
Narrated Al-Awwam:
I asked Muhajid regarding the prostration in Surat Sad. He said, "Ibn Abbas
was asked the same question and he said, 'Those are they (the prophets)
whom Allah had Guided. So follow their guidance." (6.90) Ibn 'Abbas used
to perform a prostration (on reading this Sura).
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 331:
Narrated Al-Awwam:
I asked Mujahid regarding the prostration in Surat Sad. He said, "I asked Ibn
'Abbas, 'What evidence makes you prostrate?' He said, "Don't you recite:-'And among his progeny, David and Solomon..(6.84). Those are they whom
Allah had guided. So follow their guidance.' (6.90) So David was the one of
those prophets whom Prophet (Muhammad) was ordered to follow. David
prostrated, so Allah's Apostle (Muhammad) performed this prostration too.'

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 332:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Last night a demon from the Jinns came to me (or the
Prophet said, a similar sentence) to disturb my prayer, but Allah gave me the
power to overcome him. I intended to tie him to one of the pillars of the
mosque till the morning so that all of you could see him, but then I
remembered the Statement of my brother Solomon:--'My Lord! Forgive me
and bestow on me a kingdom such as shall not belong to any other after
me.' (38.35) The narrator added: Then he (the Prophet) dismissed him,
rejected. 'Nor am I one of the pretenders (a person who pretends things
which do not exist).' (38.86)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 333:
Narrated Masruq:
We came upon 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud and he said "O people! If somebody
knows something, he can say it, but if he does not know it, he should say,
"Allah knows better,' for it is a sign of having knowledge to say about
something which one does not know, 'Allah knows better.' Allah said to His
Prophet: 'Say (O Muhammad ! ) No wage do I ask of You for this (Quran) nor
am I one of the pretenders (a person who pretends things which do not
exist).' (38.86) Now I will tell you about Ad-Dukhan (the smoke), Allah's
Apostle invited the Quraish to embrace Islam, but they delayed their
response. So he said, "O Allah! Help me against them by sending on them
seven years of famine similar to the seven years of famine of Joseph." So
the famine year overtook them and everything was destroyed till they ate
dead animals and skins. People started imagining to see smoke between
them and the sky because of severe hunger. Allah said:
'Then watch you for the Day that the sky will bring forth a kind of smoke
plainly visible, covering the people. . . This is painful torment.' (44.10-11) (So
they invoked Allah) "Our Lord! Remove the punishment from us really we
are believers." How can there be an (effectual) reminder for them when an
Apostle, explaining things clearly, has already come to them? Then they had
turned away from him and said: 'One taught (by a human being), a
madman?' 'We shall indeed remove punishment for a while, but truly, you
will revert (to disbelief).' (44.12-15) Will the punishment be removed on the
Day of Resurrection?" 'Abdullah added, "The punishment was removed from
them for a while but they reverted to disbelief, so Allah destroyed them on
the Day of Badr. Allah said:
'The day We shall seize you with a mighty grasp. We will indeed (then) exact
retribution." (44.16)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 334:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Some pagans who committed murders in great number and committed
illegal sexual intercourse excessively, came to Muhammad and said, "O
Muhammad! Whatever you say and invite people to, is good: but we wish if
you could inform us whether we can make an expiration for our (past evil)
deeds." So the Divine Verses came: 'Those who invoke not with Allah any
other god, not kill such life as Allah has forbidden except for just cause, nor
commit illegal sexual intercourse.' (25.68) And there was also revealed:-'Say: O My slaves who have transgressed against their souls! Despair not of
the Mercy of Allah.' (39.53)
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 335:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
A (Jewish) Rabbi came to Allah's Apostle and he said, "O Muhammad! We
learn that Allah will put all the heavens on one finger, and the earths on one
finger, and the trees on one finger, and the water and the dust on one
finger, and all the other created beings on one finger. Then He will say, 'I am
the King.' Thereupon the Prophet smiled so that his pre-molar teeth became
visible, and that was the confirmation of the Rabbi. Then Allah's Apostle
recited:
'No just estimate have they made of Allah such as due to Him.' (39.67)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 336:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Allah will hold the whole earth, and roll all
the heavens up in His Right Hand, and then He will say, 'I am the King; where
are the kings of the earth?"'

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 337:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "I will be the first to raise my head after the second
blowing of the trumpet and will see Moses hanging the Throne, and I will
not know whether he had been in that state all the time or after the blowing
of the trumpet."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 338:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Between the two blowing of the trumpet there will be
forty." The people said, "O Abu Huraira! Forty days?" I refused to reply. The
said, "Forty years?" I refused to reply and added: Everything of the human
body will decay except the coccyx bone (of the tail) and from that bone
Allah will reconstruct the whole body.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 339:
Narrated Urwa bin Az-Zubair:
I asked 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As to inform me of the worst thing the
pagans had done to Allah's Apostle. He said: "While Allah's Apostle was
praying in the courtyard of the ka'ba, 'Uqba bin Abi Mu'ait came and seized
Allah's Apostle by the shoulder and twisted his garment round his neck and
throttled him severely. Abu Bakr came and seized 'Uqba's shoulder and
threw him away from Allah's Apostle and said, "Would you kill a man
because he says: 'My Lord is Allah,' and has come to you with clear Signs
from your Lord?" (40.28)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 340:
Narrated Ibn Mas'ud:
(regarding) the Verse: 'And you have not been screening against yourself
lest your ears, and your eyes and your skins should testify against you..'
(41.22) While two persons from Quraish and their brother-in-law from Thaqif
(or two persons from Thaqif and their brother-in-law from Quraish) were in
a house, they said to each other, "Do you think that Allah hears our talks?"
Some said, "He hears a portion thereof" Others said, "If He can hear a
portion of it, He can hear all of it." Then the following Verse was revealed:
'And you have not been screening against yourself lest your ears, and your
eyes and your skins should testify against you...' (41.22)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 341:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
There gathered near the House (i.e. the Ka'ba) two Quraishi persons and a
person from Thaqif (or two persons from Thaqif and one from Quraish), and
all of them with very fat bellies but very little intelligence. One of them said,
"Do you think that Allah hears what we say?" Another said, "He hears us
when we talk in a loud voice, but He doesn't hear us when we talk in a low
tone." The third said, "If He can hear when we talk in a loud tone, then He
can also hear when we speak in a low tone." Then Allah, the Honorable, the
Majestic revealed:
'And you have not been screening against yourself lest your ears, and eyes
and your skins should testify against you....' (41.22-23)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 342:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud:
(As above, Hadith No. 341).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 343:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
That he was asked (regarding):
"Except to be kind to me for my Kinship with you.' (42.23) Said bin Zubair
(who was present then) said, "It means here (to show what is due for) the
relatives of Muhammad." On that Ibn Abbas said: you have hurried in giving
the answer! There was no branch of the tribe of Quraish but the Prophet
had relatives therein. The Prophet said, "I do not want anything from (you )
except to be Kind to me for my Kinship with you."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 344:
Narrated Ya'la:
I heard the Prophet reciting when on the pulpit: 'They will cry, "O Malik
(Keeper of Hell) Let your Lord make an end of us.' (43.77)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 345:
Narrated Abdullah:
Five things have passed, i.e. the smoke, the defeat of the Romans, the
splitting of the moon, Al-Batsha (the defeat of the infidels in the battle of
Badr) and Al-Lizam (the punishment)'

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 346:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
It (i.e., the imagined smoke) was because, when the Quraish refused to obey
the Prophet, he asked Allah to afflict them with years of famine similar to
those of (Prophet) Joseph. So they were stricken with famine and fatigue,
so much so that they ate even bones. A man would look towards the sky
and imagine seeing something like smoke between him and the sky because
of extreme fatigue. So Allah revealed:-'Then watch you for the Day that the sky will bring forth a kind of smoke
plainly visible, covering the people; this is a painfull of torment.' (44.10-11)
Then someone (Abu Sufyan) came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Invoke Allah to send rain for the tribes of Mudar for they are on the
verge of destruction." On that the Prophet said (astonishingly) "Shall I
invoke Allah) for the tribes of Mudar? Verily, you are a brave man!" But the
Prophet prayed for rain and it rained for them. Then the Verse was revealed.
'But truly you will return (to disbelief).' (44.15) (When the famine was over
and) they restored prosperity and welfare, they reverted to their ways (of
heathenism) whereupon Allah revealed:
'On the Day when We shall seize you with a Mighty Grasp. We will indeed
(then) exact retribution.' (44.16) The narrator said, "That was the day of the
Battle of Badr."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 347:
Narrated Abdullah:
It is a sign of having knowledge that, when you do not know something, you
say: 'Allah knows better.' Allah said to his Prophet:
'Say: No wage do I ask of you for this (Qur'an), nor am I one of the
pretenders (a person who pretends things which do not exist)' (38.86)
When the Quraish troubled and stood against the Prophet he said, "O Allah!
Help me against them by afflicting them with seven years of famine like the
seven years of Joseph." So they were stricken with a year of famine during
which they ate bones and dead animals because of too much suffering, and
one of them would see something like smoke between him and the sky
because of hunger. Then they said: Our Lord! Remove the torment from us,
really we are believers. (44.12) And then it was said to the Prophet (by
Allah), "If we remove it from them. they will revert to their ways (of
heathenism)." So the Prophet invoked his Lord, who removed the
punishment from them, but later they reverted (to heathenism), whereupon
Allah punished them on the day of the Battle of Badr, and that is what
Allah's Statement indicates:
'Then watch for the day that the sky will bring forth a kind of smoke plainly
visible...we will indeed (then) exact retribution.' (44.10).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 348:
Narrated Masruq:
I came upon 'Abdullah and he said, "When Allah's Apostle invited Quraish
(to Islam), they disbelieved him and stood against him. So he (the Prophet)
said, "O Allah! Help me against them by afflicting them with seven years of
famine similar to the seven years of Joseph.' So they were stricken with a
year of drought that destroyed everything, and they started eating dead
animals, and if one of them got up he would see something like smoke
between him and the sky from the severe fatigue and hunger." Abdullah
then recited:-'Then watch you for the Day that the sky will bring forth a kind of smoke
plainly visible, covering the people. This is a painful torment... (till he
reached) ........ We shall indeed remove the punishment for a while, but truly
you will revert (to heathenism): (44.10-15) 'Abdullah added: "Will the
punishment be removed from them on the Day of Resurrection?" He
added," The severe grasp" was the Day of the Battle of Badr."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 349:
Narrated Abdullah:
Allah sent (the Prophet) Muhammad and said:-'Say, No wage do I ask of you for this (Qur'an) nor am I one of the
pretenders (i.e. a person who pretends things which do not exist). (38.68)
When Allah's Apostle saw Quraish standing against him, he said, "O Allah!
Help me against them by afflicting them with seven years of famine similar
to the seven years (of famine) of Joseph. So they were afflicted with a year
of drought that destroyed everything, and they ate bones and hides. (One of
them said), "And they ate hides and dead animals, and (it seemed to them
that) something like smoke was coming out of the earth. So Abu Sufyan
came to the Prophet and said, "O Muhammad! Your people are on the verge
of destruction! Please invoke Allah to relieve them." So the Prophet invoked
Allah for them (and the famine disappeared). He said to them. "You will
revert (to heathenism) after that." 'Abdullah then recited:
'Then watch you for the Day that the sky will bring forth a kind of smoke
plainly visible.......but truly you will revert (to disbelief).' He added, "Will the
punishment be removed from them in the Hereafter? The smoke and the
grasp and the Al-Lizam have all passed." One of the sub-narrater said, "The
splitting of the moon." And another said, "The defeat of the Romans (has
passed)."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 350:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
Five things have passed: Al-Lizam, the defeat of the Romans, the mighty
grasp, the splitting of the moon, and the smoke.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 351:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah said, 'The son of Adam hurts me for he abuses
Time though I am Time: in My Hands are all things, and I cause the revolution
of day and night.'

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 352:
Narrated Yusuf bin Mahak:
Marwan had been appointed as the governor of Hijaz by Muawiya. He
delivered a sermon and mentioned Yazid bin Muawiya so that the people
might take the oath of allegiance to him as the successor of his father
(Muawiya). Then 'Abdur Rahman bin Abu Bakr told him something
whereupon Marwan ordered that he be arrested. But 'Abdur-Rahman
entered 'Aisha's house and they could not arrest him. Marwan said, "It is he
('AbdurRahman) about whom Allah revealed this Verse:-'And the one who says to his parents: 'Fie on you! Do you hold out the
promise to me..?'"
On that, 'Aisha said from behind a screen, "Allah did not reveal anything
from the Qur'an about us except what was connected with the declaration
of my innocence (of the slander)."
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 353:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet), I never saw Allah's Apostle laughing loudly
enough to enable me to see his uvula, but he used to smile only. And
whenever he saw clouds or winds, signs of deep concern would appear on
his face. I said, "O Allah's Apostle! When people see clouds they usually feel
happy, hoping that it would rain, while I see that when you see clouds, one
could notice signs of dissatisfaction on your face." He said, "O 'Aisha! What
is the guarantee for me that there will be no punishment in it, since some
people were punished with a wind? Verily, some people saw (received) the
punishment, but (while seeing the cloud) they said, 'This cloud will give us
rain.' "

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 354:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah created His creation, and when He had finished it,
the womb, got up and caught hold of Allah whereupon Allah said, "What is
the matter?' On that, it said, 'I seek refuge with you from those who sever
the ties of Kith and kin.' On that Allah said, 'Will you be satisfied if I bestow
My favors on him who keeps your ties, and withhold My favors from him
who severs your ties?' On that it said, 'Yes, O my Lord!' Then Allah said, 'That
is for you.' " Abu Huraira added: If you wish, you can recite: "Would you then
if you were given the authority. do mischief in the land and sever your ties of
kinship. (47. 22)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 355:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
(As above, No. 354, but added) Then Allah's Apostle said, "Recite if you
wish: "Would you then." ..(47.22)
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 356:
Narrated Muawiya bin Abi Al-Muzarrad:
Allah's Apostle, said, "Recite if you wish: Would you then if you were given
the authority." (47.22)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 357:
Narrated Aslam:
While Allah's Apostle was proceeding at night during one of his journeys and
'Umar bin Al-Khattab was traveling beside him, 'Umar asked him about
something but Allah's Apostle did not reply. He asked again, but he did not
reply, and then he asked (for the third time) but he did not reply. On that,
'Umar bin Al-Khattab said to himself, "Thakilat Ummu 'Umar (May 'Umar's
mother lose her son)! I asked Allah's Apostle three times but he did not
reply." 'Umar then said, "I made my camel run faster and went ahead of the
people, and I was afraid that some Qur'anic Verses might be revealed about
me. But before getting involved in any other matter. I heard somebody
calling me. I said to myself, 'I fear that some Qur'anic Verses have been
revealed about me,' and so I went to Allah's Apostle and greeted him.
He (Allah's Apostle ) said, 'Tonight a Sura has been revealed to me, and it is
dearer to me than that on which the sun rises (i.e. the world)' Then he
recited: "Verily, We have given you a manifest victory." (48.1)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 358:
Narrated Anas:
"Verily, We have given you (O Muhammad) a manifest victory.' refers to AlHudaibiya Peace treaty).
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 359:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mughaffal:
On the Day of the Conquest of Mecca, the Prophet recited Surat Al-Fath in a
vibrating and pleasant voice. (Muawaiya, the subnarrator said, "If I could
imitate the recitation of the Prophet I would do so.")

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 360:
Narrated Al-Mughira:
The Prophet used to offer night prayers till his feet became swollen.
Somebody said, to him," "Allah has forgiven you, your faults of the past and
those to follow." On that, he said, "Shouldn't I be a thankful slave of Allah)?"

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 361:
Narrated Aisha:
The Prophet used to offer prayer at night (for such a long time) that his feet
used to crack. I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Why do you do it since Allah has
forgiven you your faults of the past and those to follow?" He said,
"Shouldn't I love to be a thankful slave (of Allah)?' When he became old, he
prayed while sitting, but if he wanted to perform a bowing, he wound get
up, recite (some other verses) and then perform the bowing.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 362:
Narrated Abdullah bin Amr bin Al-As:
This Verse:
'Verily We have sent you (O Muhammad) as a witness, as a bringer of glad
tidings and as a warner.' (48.8)
Which is in the Qur'an, appears in the Surah thus: 'Verily We have sent you
(O Muhammad) as a witness, as a bringer of glad tidings and as a warner,
and as a protector for the illiterates (i.e., the Arabs.) You are my slave and
My Apostle, and I have named you Al-Mutawakkil (one who depends upon
Allah). You are neither hard-hearted nor of fierce character, nor one who
shouts in the markets. You do not return evil for evil, but excuse and forgive.
Allah will not take you unto Him till He guides through you a crocked
(curved) nation on the right path by causing them to say: "None has the
right to be worshipped but Allah." With such a statement He will cause to
open blind eyes, deaf ears and hardened hearts.'

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 363:
Narrated Al-Bara:
While a man from the companions of the Prophet was reciting (Quran) and
his horse was tied in the house, the horse got startled and started jumping.
The man came out, looked around but could not find anything, yet the horse
went on jumping. The next morning he mentioned that to the Prophet.
The Prophet said, "That was the tranquility (calmness) which descended
because of the recitation of the Quran."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 364:
Narrated Jabir:
We were one thousand and four hundred on the Day of Al-Hudaibiya.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 365:
Narrated 'Uqba bin Sahban:
'Abdullah bin Mughaffal Al-Muzani who was one of those who witnessed
(the event of) the tree, said, "The Prophet forbade the throwing of small
stones (with two fingers)." 'Abdullah bin Al-Mughaffal Al-Muzani also said,
"The Prophet also forbade urinating at the place where one takes a bath."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 366:
Narrated Thabit bin Ad-Dahhak:
who was one of the companions of the tree (those who swore allegiance to
the Prophet beneath the tree at Al-Hudaibiya):

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 367:
Narrated Habib bin Abi Thabit:
I went to Abu Wail to ask him (about those who had rebelled against 'Ali).
On that Abu Wail said, "We were at Siffin (a city on the bank of the
Euphrates, the place where me battle took place between 'Ali and Muawiya)
A man said, "Will you be on the side of those who are called to consult
Allah's Book (to settle the dispute)?" 'Ali said, 'Yes (I agree that we should
settle the matter in the light of the Qur'an)." ' Some people objected to
'Ali's agreement and wanted to fight. On that Sahl bin Hunaif said, 'Blame
yourselves! I remember how, on the day of Al-Hudaibiya (i.e. the peace
treaty between the Prophet and the Quraish pagans), if we had been
allowed to choose fighting, we would have fought (the pagans). At that
time 'Umar came (to the Prophet) and said, "Aren't we on the right (path)
and they (pagans) in the wrong? Won't our killed persons go to Paradise,
and theirs in the Fire?" The Prophet replied, "Yes." Umar further said, "Then
why should we let our religion be degraded and return before Allah has
settled the matter between us?" The Prophet said, "O the son of Al-Khattab!
No doubt, I am Allah's Apostle and Allah will never neglect me." So Umar
left the place angrily and he was so impatient that he went to Abu Bakr and
said, "O Abu Bakr! Aren't we on the right (path) and they (pagans) on the
wrong?" Abu Bakr said, "O the son of Al-Khattab! He is Allah's Apostle, and
Allah will never neglect him." Then Sura Al-Fath (The Victory) was revealed."
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 368:
Narrated Ibn Abi Mulaika:
The two righteous persons were about to be ruined. They were Abu Bakr
and 'Umar who raised their voices in the presence of the Prophet when a
mission from Bani Tamim came to him. One of the two recommended AlAqra' bin Habeas, the brother of Bani Mujashi (to be their governor) while
the other recommended somebody else. (Nafi', the sub-narrator said, I do
not remember his name). Abu Bakr said to Umar, "You wanted nothing but
to oppose me!" 'Umar said, "I did not intend to oppose you." Their voices
grew loud in that argument, so Allah revealed:
'O you who believe! Raise not your voices above the voice of the Prophet.'
(49.2) Ibn Az-Zubair said, "Since the revelation of this Verse, 'Umar used to
speak in such a low tone that the Prophet had to ask him to repeat his
statements." But Ibn Az-Zubair did not mention the same about his
(maternal) grandfather (i.e. Abu Bakr).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 369:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet missed Thabit bin Qais for a period (So he inquired about him).
A man said. "O Allah's Apostle! I will bring you his news." So he went to
Thabit and found him sitting in his house and bowing his head. The man said
to Thabit, " 'What is the matter with you?" Thabit replied that it was an evil
affair, for he used to raise his voice above the voice of the Prophet and so all
his good deeds had been annulled, and he considered himself as one of the
people of the Fire. Then the man returned to the Prophet and told him that
Thabit had said, so-and-so. (Musa bin Anas) said: The man returned to Thabit
with great glad tidings. The Prophet said to the man. "Go back to him and
say to him: "You are not from the people of the Hell Fire, but from the
people of Paradise."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 370:
Narrated Abdullah bin Az-Zubair:
A group of Bani Tamim came to the Prophet (and requested him to appoint
a governor for them). Abu Bakr said, "Appoint Al-Qaqa bin Mabad." Umar
said, "Appoint Al-Aqra' bin Habeas." On that Abu Bakr said (to 'Umar). "You
did not want but to oppose me!" 'Umar replied "I did not intend to oppose
you!" So both of them argued till their voices grew loud. So the following
Verse was revealed:
'O you who believe! Be not for ward......' (49.1)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 371:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "The people will be thrown into the (Hell) Fire and it will
say: "Are there any more (to come)?' (50.30) till Allah puts His Foot over it
and it will say, 'Qati! Qati! (Enough Enough!)'"

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 372:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
(that the Prophet said) "It will be said to the Hell, 'Are you filled?' It will say,
'Are there any more (to come)?' On that Allah will put His Foot on it, and it
will say 'Qati! Qati! (Enough! Enough!)."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 373:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Paradise and the Fire (Hell) argued, and the Fire (Hell)
said, "I have been given the privilege of receiving the arrogant and the
tyrants.' Paradise said, 'What is the matter with me? Why do only the weak
and the humble among the people enter me?' On that, Allah said to
Paradise. 'You are My Mercy which I bestow on whoever I wish of my
servants.' Then Allah said to the (Hell) Fire, 'You are my (means of)
punishment by which I punish whoever I wish of my slaves. And each of you
will have its fill.' As for the Fire (Hell), it will not be filled till Allah puts His
Foot over it whereupon it will say, 'Qati! Qati!' At that time it will be filled,
and its different parts will come closer to each other; and Allah will not
wrong any of His created beings. As regards Paradise, Allah will create a new
creation to fill it with."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 374:
Narrated Jarir bin Abdullah:
We were in the company of the Prophet on a fourteenth night (of the lunar
month), and he looked at the (full) moon and said, "You will see your Lord
as you see this moon, and you will have no trouble in looking at Him. So,
whoever can, should not miss the offering of prayers before sunrise (Fajr
prayer) and before sunset (Asr prayer)." Then the Prophet recited:
'And celebrate the praises of your Lord before the rising of the sun and
before (its) setting.' (50.39)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 375:
Narrated Mujahid:
Ibn Abbas said, "Allah ordered His Prophet to celebrate Allah's praises after
all prayers." He refers to His Statement: 'After the prayers.' (50.40)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 376:
Narrated Um Salama:
I complained to Allah's Apostle that I was sick, so he said, "Perform the
Tawaf (of Ka'ba at Mecca) while riding behind the people (who are
performing the Tawaf on foot)." So I performed the Tawaf while Allah's
Apostle was offering the prayer by the side of the Ka'ba and was reciting:
'By the Mount (Saini) and by a Decree Inscribed.'

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 377:
Narrated Jubair bin Mut'im:
I heard the Prophet reciting Surat At-Tur in the Maghrib prayer, and when he
reached the Verse:
'Were they created by nothing, Or were they themselves the creators, Or did
they create the Heavens and the Earth? Nay, but they have no firm belief Or
do they own the treasures of Your Lord? Or have they been given the
authority to do as they like...' (52.35-37) my heart was about to fly (when I
realized this firm argument).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 378:
Narrated Masruq:
I said to 'Aisha, "O Mother! Did Prophet Muhammad see his Lord?" Aisha
said, "What you have said makes my hair stand on end ! Know that if
somebody tells you one of the following three things, he is a liar: Whoever
tells you that Muhammad saw his Lord, is a liar." Then Aisha recited the
Verse:
'No vision can grasp Him, but His grasp is over all vision. He is the Most
Courteous Well-Acquainted with all things.' (6.103) 'It is not fitting for a
human being that Allah should speak to him except by inspiration or from
behind a veil.' (42.51) 'Aisha further said, "And whoever tells you that the
Prophet knows what is going to happen tomorrow, is a liar." She then
recited:
'No soul can know what it will earn tomorrow.' (31.34) She added: "And
whoever tell you that he concealed (some of Allah's orders), is a liar." Then
she recited: 'O Apostle! Proclaim (the Message) which has been sent down
to you from your Lord..' (5.67) 'Aisha added. "But the Prophet saw Gabriel in
his true form twice."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 379:
Narrated Abdullah:
Regarding the Verses: 'And was at a distance of but two bow-lengths or
(even) nearer; So did (Allah) convey the Inspiration to His slave (Gabriel) and
then he Gabriel) conveyed (that to Muhammad...' (53.9-10) Ibn Mas'ud
narrated to us that the Prophet had seen Gabriel with six hundred wings.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 380:
Narrated ASSAILANT:
I asked Sir about the Statement of Allah:
'And was at a distance of but two bow-lengths or (even) nearer. So did Allah
convey the Inspiration to His slave (Gabriel) and then he (Gabriel) conveyed
that to Muhammad.' (53.10) He said, "Abdullah (bin Mas'ud) informed us
that Muhammad had seen Gabriel with six hundred wings."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 381:
Narrated Abdullah:
(regarding the revelation) Truly he (Muhammad) did see of the signs of his
Lord; the Greatest!' (53.18) The Prophet saw a green screen covering the
horizon.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 382:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
(regarding His Statement about the Lat and the Uzza: Lat was originally a
man who used to mix Sawiq for the pilgrim.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 383:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whomever takes an oath in which he mentions Lat and
'Uzza (forgetfully), should say: None has the right to be worshipped but
Allah, and whoever says to his companion. 'Come along, let us gamble must
give alms (as an expiation)."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 384:
Narrated 'Urwa:
I asked 'Aisha (regarding the Sai between As Safa and Al-Marwa). She said,
"Out of reverence to the idol Manat which was placed in Al-Mushailal, those
who used to assume Ihram in its name, used not to perform Sai between AsSafa and Al-Marwa, so Allah revealed:
'Verily! The As-Safa and Al-Marwa (two mountains at Mecca) are among the
symbols of Allah.' (2.158).
Thereupon, Allah's Apostle and the Muslims used to perform Sai (between
them)." Sufyan said: The (idol) Manat was at Al-Mushailal in Qudaid. 'Aisha
added, "The Verse was revealed in connection with the Ansar. They and (the
tribe of) Ghassan used to assume lhram in the name of Manat before they
embraced Islam." 'Aisha added, "There were men from the Ansar who used
to assume lhram in the name of Manat which was an idol between Mecca
and Medina. They said, "O Allah's Apostle! We used not to perform the
Tawaf (Sai) between As-Safa and Al-Marwa out of reverence to Manat."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 385:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet performed a prostration when he finished reciting Surat-anNajm, and all the Muslims and pagans and Jinns and human beings
prostrated along with him.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 386:
Narrated Abdullah:
The first Sura in which a prostration was mentioned, was Sura An-Najm (The
Star). Allah's Apostle prostrated (while reciting it), and everybody behind
him prostrated except a man whom I saw taking a hand-full of dust in his
hand and prostrated on it. Later I saw that man killed as an infidel, and he
was Umaiya bin Khalaf.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 387:
Narrated Ibn Masud:
During the lifetime of Allah's Apostle the moon was split into two parts; one
part remained over the mountain, and the other part went beyond the
mountain. On that, Allah's Apostle said, "Witness this miracle."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 388:
Narrated Abdullah:
The moon was cleft asunder while we were in the company of the Prophet,
and it became two parts. The Prophet said, Witness, witness (this miracle)."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 389:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The moon was cleft asunder during the lifetime of the Prophet
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 390:
Narrated Anas:
The people of Mecca asked the Prophet to show them a sign (miracle). So
he showed them (the miracle) of the cleaving of the moon.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 391:
Narrated Anas:
The moon was cleft asunder into two parts.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 393:
Narrated Abdullah:
The Prophet used to recite: 'Is there any that remember? And a furious wind
(plucking out men) as if they were uprooted stems of palm trees, then how
terrible was My punishment and My warnings!' (54.20-21)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 394:
Narrated Abu Ishaq:
A man asked Al-Aswad, 'is it 'Fahal min-Muddakir' or'..Mudhdhakir?" Al
Aswad replied, 'I have heard Abdullah bin Masud reciting it, 'Fahal-min
Muddakir'; I too, heard the Prophet reciting it 'Fahal-min-Muddakir' with 'd'.
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 395:
Narrated Abdullah:
The Prophet recited: 'Fahal-min-Muddakir' "And Verily an abiding torment
seized them early in the morning So, taste you My torment and My
warnings' (54.38-39)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 396:
Narrated Abdullah:
The Prophet recited: 'Fahal-min Muddakir': 'And verily, We have destroyed
nations like unto you; then is there any that will receive admonition?' (54.51)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 397:
Narrated Abdullah:
I recited before the Prophet 'Fahal-min-Mudhdhakir'. The Prophet said, "It is
Fahal-min Muddakir."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 398:
Narrated Abbas:
Allah's Apostle while in a tent on the day of the Battle of Badr, said, "O Allah!
I request you (to fulfill) Your promise and contract! O Allah! If You wish that
you will not be worshipped henceforth.." On that Abu Bakr held the Prophet
by the hand and said, "That is enough, O Allah's Apostle You have appealed
to your Lord too pressingly," while the Prophet was putting on his armor. So
Allah's Apostle went out, reciting Their multitude will be put to flight, and
they will show their backs.' (54.45)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 399:
Narrated Yusuf bin Mahik:
I was in the house of 'Aisha, the mother of the Believers. She said, "This
revelation: "Nay, but the Hour is their appointed time (for their full
recompense); and the Hour will be more previous and most bitter." (54.46)
was revealed to Muhammad at Mecca while I was a playfull little girl."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 400:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
While in his tent on the day the Battle of Badr, the Prophet said, "O Allah! I
request You (to fulfill) Your promise and contract. O Allah! It You wish that
the Believers be destroyed). You will never be worshipped henceforth." On
that, Abu Bakr held the Prophet by the hand and said, "That is enough, O
Allah's Apostle! You have appealed to your Lord too pressingly" The Prophet
was wearing his armor and then went out reciting:
'Their multitude will be put to flight and they will show their backs. Nay, but
the Hour is their appointed time (for their full recompense), and the Hour
will be more previous and most bitter.' (54.45-46)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 401:
Narrated Abdullah bin Qais:
Allah's Apostle said, "Two gardens, the utensils and the contents of which
are of silver, and two other gardens, the utensils and contents of which are
of gold. And nothing will prevent the people who will be in the Garden of
Eden from seeing their Lord except the curtain of Majesty over His Face."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 402:
Narrated Abdullah bin Qais:
Allah's Apostle said, "In Paradise there is a pavilion made of a single hollow
pearl sixty miles wide, in each corner of which there are wives who will not
see those in the other corners; and the believers will visit and enjoy them.
And there are two gardens, the utensils and contents of which are made of
silver; and two other gardens, the utensils and contents of which are made
of so-and-so (i.e. gold) and nothing will prevent the people staying in the
Garden of Eden from seeing their Lord except the curtain of Majesty over
His Face."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 403:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "In Paradise there is a tree which is so big that a rider can
travel in its shade for one hundred years without passing it; and if you wish,
you can recite:

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 404:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
I asked Ibn Abbas about Surat Al-Tauba, and he said, "Surat Al-Tauba? It is
exposure (of all the evils of the infidels and the hypocrites). And it continued
revealing (that the oft-repeated expression): '...and of them ...and of them.'
till they started thinking that none would be left unmentioned therein." I
said, "What about) Surat Al-Anfal?" He replied, "Surat Al-Anfal was revealed
in connection with the Badr Battle." I said, "(What about) Surat Al-Hashr?"
He replied, "It was revealed in connection with Bani an-Nadir."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 405:
Narrated Said:
I asked Ibn 'Abbas about Surat Al-Hashr. He replied, "Say Surat An-Nadir."
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 406:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
'Allah's Apostle burnt and cut down the palm trees of Bani An-Nadir which
were at Al-Buwair (a place near Medina). There upon Allah revealed:
'What you (O Muslims) cut down of the palm trees (of the enemy) or you
left them standing on their stems, it was by the leave of Allah, so that He
might cover with shame the rebellious.' (59.5)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 407:
Narrated Umar:
The properties of Bam An-Nadir were among the booty that Allah gave to
His Apostle such Booty were not obtained by any expedition on the part of
Muslims, neither with cavalry, nor with camelry. So those properties were
for Allah's Apostle only, and he used to provide thereof the yearly
expenditure for his wives, and dedicate the rest of its revenues for
purchasing arms and horses as war material to be used in Allah's Cause.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 408:
Narrated Alqama:
'Abdullah (bin Masud) said. "Allah curses those ladies who practice
tattooing and those who get themselves tattooed, and those ladies who
remove the hair from their faces and those who make artificial spaces
between their teeth in order to look more beautiful whereby they change
Allah's creation." His saying reached a lady from Bani Asd called Um Yaqub
who came (to Abdullah) and said, "I have come to know that you have
cursed such-and-such (ladies)?" He replied, "Why should I not curse these
whom Allah's Apostle has cursed and who are (cursed) in Allah's Book!" Um
Yaqub said, "I have read the whole Quran, but I did not find in it what you
say." He said, "Verily, if you have read it (i.e. the Quran), you have found it.
Didn't you read:
'And whatsoever the Apostle gives you take it and whatsoever he forbids
you, you abstain (from it). (59.7)
She replied, "Yes, I did," He said, "Verily, Allah's Apostle forbade such
things." "She said, "But I see your wife doing these things?" He said, "Go and
watch her." She went and watched her but could not see anything in
support of her statement. On that he said, "If my wife was as you thought, I
would not keep her in my company."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 409:
Narrated Abdullah (bin Mus'ud):
Allah's Apostle has cursed the lady who uses false hair.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 410:
Narrated 'Umar:
I recommend that my successor should take care of and secure the rights of
the early emigrants; and I also advise my successor to be kind to the Ansar
who had homes (in Medina) and had adopted the Faith, before the Prophet
migrated to them, and to accept the good from their good ones and excuse
their wrong doers.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 411:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I am suffering
from fatigue and hunger." The Prophet sent (somebody) to his wives (to get
something), but the messenger found nothing with them. Then Allah's
Apostle said (to his companions). "Isn't there anybody who can entertain
this man tonight so that Allah may be merciful to him?" An Ansari man got
up and said, "I (will, entertain him), O Allah's Apostle!" So he went to his
wife and said to her, "This is the guest of Allah's Apostle, so do not keep
anything away from him." She said. "By Allah, I have nothing but the
children's food." He said, "When the children ask for their dinner, put them
to bed and put out the light; we shall not take our meals tonight," She did
so. In the morning the Ansari man went to Allah's Apostle who said, "Allah
was pleased with (or He bestowed His Mercy) on so-and-so and his wife
(because of their good deed)." Then Allah revealed:
'But give them preference over themselves even though they were in need
of that.' (59.9)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 412:
Narrated Ali:
Allah's Apostle sent me along with AzZubair and Al-Miqdad and said,
"Proceed till you reach a place called Raudat-Khakh where there is a lady
travelling in a howda on a camel. She has a letter. Take the letter from her."
So we set out, and our horses ran at full pace till we reached Raudat Khakh,
and behold, we saw the lady and said (to her), "Take out the letter!" She
said, "I have no letter with me." We said, "Either you take out the letter or
we will strip you of your clothes." So she took the letter out of her hair
braid. We brought the letter to the Prophet and behold, it was addressed by
Hatib bin Abi Balta'a to some pagans at Mecca, informing them of some of
the affairs of the Prophet. The Prophet said, "What is this, O Hatib?" Hatib
replied, "Do not be hasty with me, O Allah's Apostle! I am an Ansari man and
do not belong to them (Quraish infidels) while the emigrants who were with
you had their relatives who used to protect their families and properties at
Mecca. So, to compensate for not having blood relation with them.' I
intended to do them some favor so that they might protect my relatives (at
Mecca), and I did not do this out of disbelief or an inclination to desert my
religion." The Prophet then said (to his companions), "He (Hatib) has told
you the truth." 'Umar said, "O Allah's Apostle! Allow me to chop his head
off?" The Apostle said, "He is one of those who witnessed (fought in) the
Battle of Badr, and what do you know, perhaps Allah looked upon the
people of Badr (Badr warriors) and said, 'Do what you want as I have
forgiven you.' " (Amr, a sub-narrator, said,: This Verse was revealed about
him (Hatib):
'O you who believe! Take not My enemies and your enemies as friends or
protectors.' (60.1)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 413:
Narrated 'Ali:
Sufyan was asked whether (the Verse): 'Take not My enemies and your
enemies...'
was revealed in connection with Hatib. Sufyan replied, "This occurs only in
the narration of the people. I memorized the Hadith from 'Amr, not
overlooking even a single letter thereof, and I do not know of anybody who
remembered it by heart other than myself."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 414:
Narrated Urwa:
Aisha the wife of the Prophet, said, "Allah's Apostle used to examine the
believing women who migrated to him in accordance with this Verse: 'O
Prophet! When believing women come to you to take the oath of allegiance
to you... Verily! Allah is Oft-Forgiving Most Merciful.' (60.12) 'Aisha said, "And
if any of the believing women accepted the condition (assigned in the
above-mentioned Verse), Allah's Apostle would say to her. "I have accepted
your pledge of allegiance." "He would only say that, for, by Allah, his hand
never touched, any lady during that pledge of allegiance. He did not receive
their pledge except by saying, "I have accepted your pledge of allegiance for
that."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 415:
Narrated Um Atiya:
We took the oath of allegiance to Allah's Apostle and he recited to us:
'They will not associate anything in worship with Allah,' and forbade us to
bewail the dead. Thereupon a lady withdrew her hand (refrained from
taking the oath of allegiance), and said, "But such-and-such lady lamented
over one of my relatives, so I must reward (do the same over the dead
relatives of) hers." The Prophet did not object to that, so she went (there)
and returned to the Prophet so he accepted her pledge of allegiance.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 416:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Regarding the saying of Allah:
'And they will not disobey you in any just matter.' (60.12) That was one of
the conditions which Allah imposed on The believing) women (who came to
take the oath of allegiance to the Prophet)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 417:
Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit:
While we were with the Prophet, he said, "Will you swear to me the pledge
of allegiance that you will not worship any thing besides Allah, will not
commit illegal sexual intercourse, and will not steal?" Then he recited the
Verse concerning the women. (Sufyan, the subnarrator, often said that the
Prophet: added, "Whoever among you fulfills his pledge, will receive his
reward from Allah, and whoever commits any of those sins and receives the
legal punishment (in this life), his punishment will be an expiation for that
sin; and whoever commits any of those sins and Allah screens him, then it is
up to Allah to punish or forgive them."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 418:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
I witnessed the 'Id-al-Fitr prayer with Allah's Apostle , Abu Bakr, 'Umar and
'Uthman; and all of them offered it before delivering the sermon... and then
delivered the sermon. Once the Prophet (after completing the prayer and
the sermon) came down, as if I am now looking at him waving at the men
with his hand to sit down, and walked through them till he, along with Bilal,
reached (the rows of) the women. Then he recited: 'O Prophet! When
believing women come to you to take the oath of allegiance that they will
not worship anything other than Allah, will not steal, will not commit illegal
sexual intercourse, will not kill their children, and will not utter slander,
intentionally forging falsehood (by making illegal children belonging to their
husbands)'....(60.12) Having finished, he said, 'Do you agree to that?" One
lady, other than whom none replied the Prophet said, "Yes, O Allah's
Apostle!" (The, sub-narrator, Al-Hasan did not know who the lady was.)
Then the Prophet said to them: "Will you give alms?" Thereupon Bilal spread
out his garment and the women started throwing big

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 419:
Narrated Jubair bin Mutim:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'I have several names: I am Muhammad and I
am Ahmad, and I am Al-Mahi with whom Allah obliterates Kufr (disbelief),
and I am Al-Hashir (gatherer) at whose feet (i.e. behind whom) the people
will be gathered (on the Day of Resurrection), and I am Al-Aqib (i.e. who
succeeds the other prophets in bringing about good)."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 420:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
While we were sitting with the Prophet Surat Al-Jumu'a was revealed to
him, and when the Verse, "And He (Allah) has sent him (Muhammad) also to
other (Muslims).....' (62.3) was recited by the Prophet, I said, "Who are they,
O Allah's Apostle?" The Prophet did not reply till I repeated my question
thrice. At that time, Salman Al-Farisi was with us. So Allah's Apostle put his
hand on Salman, saying, "If Faith were at (the place of) Ath-Thuraiya
(pleiades, the highest star), even then (some men or man from these people
(i.e. Salman's folk) would attain it."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 421:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said. Then some men from these people would attain it."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 422:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
A caravan of merchandise arrived at Medina on a Friday while we were with
the Prophet All the people left (the Prophet and headed for the caravan)
except twelve persons. Then Allah revealed:-'But when they see some bargain or some amusement they disperse
headlong to it.' ..(62.11)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 423:
Narrated Zaid bin Arqam:
While I was taking part in a Ghazwa. I heard 'Abdullah bin Ubai (bin Abi
Salul) saying. "Don't spend on those who are with Allah's Apostle, that they
may disperse and go away from him. If we return (to Medina), surely, the
more honorable will expel the meaner amongst them." I reported that
(saying) to my uncle or to 'Umar who, in his turn, informed the Prophet of it.
The Prophet called me and I narrated to him the whole story. Then Allah's
Apostle sent for 'Abdullah bin Ubai and his companions, and they took an
oath that they did not say that. So Allah's Apostle disbelieved my saying and
believed his. I was distressed as I never was before. I stayed at home and my
uncle said to me. "You just wanted Allah's Apostle to disbelieve your
statement and hate you." So Allah revealed (the Sura beginning with) 'When
the hypocrites come to you.' (63.1) The Prophet then sent for me and
recited it and said, "O Zaid! Allah confirmed your statement."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 424:
Narrated Zaid bin Arqam:
I was with my uncle and I heard 'Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul, saying, "Don't
spend on those who are with Allah's Apostle that they may disperse and go
away from him." He also said, "If we return to Medina, surely, the more
honorable will expel the meaner." So I informed my uncle of that and then
my uncle informed Allah's Apostle thereof. Allah's Apostle sent for 'Abdullah
bin Ubai and his companions. They swore that they did not say anything of
that sort Allah's Apostle deemed their statement true and rejected mine.
Thereof I became as distressed as I have never been before, and stayed at
home. Then Allah revealed (Surat Al-Munafiqin):
'When the hypocrites come to you.....(63.1) They are the ones who say:
Spend nothing on those who are with Allah's Apostle ..(63.7) Verily the more
honorable will expel therefrom the meaner..' (63.7-8)
Allah's Apostle sent for me and recited that Sura for me and said, "Allah has
confirmed your statement." 'That is because they believed, then disbelieved,
so a seal was set on their hearts, therefore they understand not.' (63.3)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 425:
Narrated Zaid bin Arqam:
When 'Abdullah bin Ubai said, "Do not spend on those who are with Allah's
Apostle," and also said, "If we return to Medina," I informed the Prophet of
his saying. The Ansar blamed me for that, and 'Abdullah bin Ubai swore that
he did not say. I returned to my house and slept. Allah's Apostle then called
me and I went to him. He said, "Allah has confirmed your statement." The
Verse: "They are the one who say: Spend nothing......(63.7) was revealed.
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 426:
Narrated Zaid bin Arqam:
We went out with the Prophet : on a journey and the people suffered from
lack of provisions. So 'Abdullah bin Ubai said to his companions, "Don't
spend on those who are with Allah's Apostle, that they may disperse and go
away from him." He also said, "If we return to Medina, surely, the more
honorable will expel therefrom the meaner. So I went to the Prophet and
informed him of that. He sent for 'Abdullah bin Ubai and asked him, but
'Abdullah bin Ubai swore that he did not say so. The people said, "Zaid told a
lie to 'Allah's Apostle." What they said distressed me very much. Later Allah
revealed the confirmation of my statement in his saying:-'(When the hypocrites come to you.' (63.1) So the Prophet called them that
they might ask Allah to forgive them, but they turned their heads aside.
(Concerning Allah's saying: 'Pieces of wood propped up,' Zaid said; They
were the most handsome men.)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 427:
Narrated Zaid bin Arqam:
While I was with my uncle, I heard 'Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul saying, "Do
not spend on those who are with Allah's Apostle, that they may disperse
and go away (from him). And if we return to Medina, surely, the more
honorable will expel therefrom the meaner. "I mentioned that to my uncle
who, in turn, mentioned it to the Prophet. The Prophet called me and I told
him about that. Then he sent for 'Abdullah bin Ubai and his companions, and
they swore that they did not say so. The Prophet disbelieved my statement
and believed theirs. I was distressed as I have never been before, and I
remained in my house. My uncle said to me, "You just wanted the Prophet
to consider you a liar and hate you." Then Allah revealed:-'When the hypocrites come to you, they say: 'We bear witness that you are
indeed the Apostle of Allah." (63.1) So the Prophet sent for me and recited it
and said, "Allah has confirmed your statement."
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 428:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
We were in a Ghazwa (Sufyan once said, in an army) and a man from the
emigrants kicked an Ansari man (on the buttocks with his foot). The Ansari
man said, "O the Ansar! (Help!)" and the emigrant said. "O the emigrants!
(Help!) Allah's Apostle heard that and said, "What is this call for, which is
characteristic of the period of ignorance?" They said, "O Allah's Apostle! A
man from the emigrants kicked one of the Ansar (on the buttocks with his
foot)." Allah's Apostle said, "Leave it (that call) as is a detestable thing."
'Abdullah bin Ubai heard that and said, 'Have the (the emigrants) done so?
By Allah, if we return Medina, surely, the more honorable will expel
therefrom the meaner." When this statement reached the Prophet. 'Umar
got up an, said, "O Allah's Apostle! Let me chop off the head of this
hypocrite ('Abdullah bin Ubai)!" The Prophet said "Leave him, lest the
people say that Muhammad kills his companions." The Ansar were then
more in number than the emigrants when the latter came to Medina, but
later on the emigrant increased.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 429:
Narrated Musa bin 'Uqba:
'Abdullah bin Al-Fadl told me that Anas bin Malik said, "I was much grieve
over those who had been killed in the Battle of Al-Harra. When Zaid bin
Arqarr heard of my intense grief (over the killed Ansar), he wrote a letter to
me saying that he heard Allah's Apostle saying, O Allah! Forgive the Ansar
and the Ansar children. The subnarrator, Ibn Al-Fadl, is not sure whether the
Prophet also said, And their grand-children." Some of those who were
present, asked Anas (about Zaid). He said, "He (Zaid) is the one about whom
Allah's Apostle said, 'He is the one whose sound hearing Allah testified.'

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 430:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
We were in a Ghazwa and a man from the emigrants kicked an Ansari (on
the buttocks with his foot). The Ansari man said, "O the Ansari! (Help!)" The
emigrant said, "O the emigrants! (Help)." When Allah's Apostle heard that,
he said, "What is that?" They said, "A man from the emigrants kicked a man
from the Ansar (on the buttocks his foot). On that the Ansar said, 'O the
Ansar!' and the emigrant said, 'O the emigrants!" The Prophet said' "Leave it
(that call) for it Is a detestable thing." The number of Ansar was larger (than
that of the emigrants) at the time when the Prophet came to Medina, but
later the number of emigrants increased. 'Abdullah bin Ubai said, "Have
they, (the emigrants) done so? By Allah, if we return to Medina, surely, the
more honorable will expel therefrom the meaner," 'Umar bin Al-Khattab
said, "O Allah's Apostle! Let me chop off the head of this hypocrite!" The
Prophet said, "Leave him, lest the people say Muhammad kills his
companions:"

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 431:
Narrated Salim:
That Abdullah bin Umar told him that he had divorced his wife while she was
in her menses so 'Umar informed Allah's Apostle
of that. Allah's Apostle became very angry at that and said, "(Ibn 'Umar
must return her to his house and keep her as his wife till she becomes clean
and then menstruates and becomes clean again, whereupon, if he wishes to
divorce her, he may do so while she is still clean and before having any
sexual relations with her, for that is the legally prescribed period for divorce
as Allah has ordered."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 432:
Narrated Abu Salama:
A man came to Ibn 'Abbas while Abu Huraira was sitting with him and said,
"Give me your verdict regarding a lady who delivered a baby forty days after
the death of her husband." Ibn 'Abbas said, "This indicates the end of one of
the two prescribed periods." I said "For those who are pregnant, their
prescribed period is until they deliver their burdens." Abu Huraira said, I
agree with my cousin (Abu Salama)." Then Ibn 'Abbas sent his slave, Kuraib
to Um Salama to ask her (regarding this matter). She replied. "The husband
of Subai 'a al Aslamiya was killed while she was pregnant, and she delivered
a baby forty days after his death. Then her hand was asked in marriage and
Allah's Apostle married her (to somebody). Abu As-Sanabil was one of those
who asked for her hand in marriage".

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 433:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
If someone says to his wife, "You are unlawful to me." he must make an
expiation (for his oath). Ibn 'Abbas added: There is for you in Allah's Apostle,
an excellent example to follow.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 434:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle used to drink honey in the house of Zainab, the daughter of
Jahsh, and would stay there with her. So Hafsa and I agreed secretly that, if
he come to either of us, she would say to him. "It seems you have eaten
Maghafir (a kind of bad-smelling resin), for I smell in you the smell of
Maghafir," (We did so) and he replied. "No, but I was drinking honey in the
house of Zainab, the daughter of Jahsh, and I shall never take it again. I have
taken an oath as to that, and you should not tell anybody about it."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 435:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
For the whole year I had the desire to ask 'Umar bin Al-Khattab regarding
the explanation of a Verse (in Surat Al-Tahrim) but I could not ask him
because I respected him very much. When he went to perform the Hajj, I too
went along with him. On our return, while we were still on the way home.
'Umar went aside to answer the call of nature by the Arak trees. I waited till
he finished and then I proceeded with him and asked him. "O chief of the
Believers! Who were the two wives of the Prophet who aided one another
against him?" He said, "They were Hafsa and 'Aisha." Then I said to him, "By
Allah, I wanted to ask you about this a year ago, but I could not do so owing
to my respect for you." 'Umar said, "Do not refrain from asking me. If you
think that I have knowledge (about a certain matter), ask me; and if I know
(something about it), I will tell you." Then Umar added, "By Allah, in the Prelslamic Period of Ignorance we did not pay attention to women until Allah
revealed regarding them what He revealed regarding them and assigned for
them what He has assigned. Once while I was thinking over a certain matter,
my wife said, "I recommend that you do so-and-so." I said to her, "What
have you got to do with the is matter? Why do you poke your nose in a
matter which I want to see fulfilled.?" She said, How strange you are, O son
of Al-Khattab! You don't want to be argued with whereas your daughter,
Hafsa surely, argues with Allah's Apostle so much that he remains angry for
a full day!" 'Umar then reported; how he at once put on his outer garment
and went to Hafsa and said to her, "O my daughter! Do you argue with
Allah's Apostle so that he remains angry the whole day?" H. afsa said, "By
Allah, we argue with him." 'Umar said, "Know that I warn you of Allah's
punishment and the anger of Allah's Apostle . . . O my daughter! Don't be
betrayed by the one who is proud of her beauty because of the love of
Allah's Apostle for her (i.e. 'Aisha)." 'Umar addled, "Then I went out to Um
Salama's house who was one of my relatives, and I talked to her. She said, O
son of Al-Khattab! It is rather astonishing that you interfere in everything;
you even want to interfere between Allah's Apostle and his wives!' By Allah,
by her talk she influenced me so much that I lost some of my anger. I left her
(and went home). At that time I had a friend from the Ansar who used to
bring news (from the Prophet) in case of my absence, and I used to bring
him the news if he was absent. In those days we were afraid of one of the
kings of Ghassan tribe. We heard that he intended to move and attack us, so
fear filled our hearts because of that. (One day) my Ansari friend
unexpectedly knocked at my door, and said, "Open Open!' I said, 'Has the
king of Ghassan come?' He said, 'No, but something worse; Allah's Apostle
has isolated himself from his wives.' I said, 'Let the nose of 'Aisha and Hafsa
be stuck to dust (i.e. humiliated)!' Then I put on my clothes and went to
Allah's Apostle's residence, and behold, he was staying in an upper room of
his to which he ascended by a ladder, and a black slave of Allah's Apostle
was (sitting) on the first step. I said to him, 'Say (to the Prophet ) 'Umar bin
Al-Khattab is here.' Then the Prophet admitted me and I narrated the story
to Allah's Apostle. When I reached the story of Um Salama, Allah's Apostle
smiled while he was lying on a mat made of palm tree leaves with nothing
between him and the mat. Underneath his head there was a leather pillow
stuffed with palm fibres, and leaves of a saut tree were piled at his feet, and
above his head hung a few water skins. On seeing the marks of the mat
imprinted on his side, I wept. He said.' 'Why are you weeping?' I replied, "O
Allah's Apostle! Caesar and Khosrau are leading the life (i.e. Luxurious life)
while you, Allah's Apostle though you are, is living in destitute". The Prophet
then replied. 'Won't you be satisfied that they enjoy this world and we the
Hereafter?' "

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 436:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
I intended to ask 'Umar so I said, "Who were those two ladies who tried to
back each other against the Prophet?" I hardly finished my speech when he
said, They were 'Aisha and Hafsa."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 437:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
I intended to ask 'Umar about those two ladies who back each other against
'Allah's Apostle . For one year I was seeking the opportunity to ask this
question, but in vain, until once when I accompanied him for Hajj. While we
were in Zahran, 'Umar went to answer the call of nature and told me to
follow him with some water for ablution. So I followed him with a container
of water and started pouring water for him. I found it a good opportunity to
ask him, so I said, "O chief of the Believers! Who were those two ladies who
had backed each other (against the Prophet)?" Before I could complete my
question, he replied, "They were 'Aisha and Hafsa."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 438:
Narrated 'Umar:
The wives of the Prophet out of their jealousy, backed each other against
the Prophet, so I said to them, "It may be, if he divorced you all, that Allah
will give him, instead of you wives better than you." So this Verse was
revealed. (66.5)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 439:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
(regarding the Verse):-- 'Cruel after all that, base-born (of illegitimate birth).'
(68.13) It was revealed in connection with a man from Quaraish who had a
notable sign (Zanamah) similar to the notable sign which usually-hung on
the neck of a sheep (to recognize it).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 440:
Narrated Haritha bin Wahb Al-Khuzai:
I heard the Prophet saying. "May I tell you of the people of Paradise? Every
weak and poor obscure person whom the people look down upon but his
oath is fulfilled by Allah when he takes an oath to do something. And may I
inform you of the people of the Hell-Fire? They are all those violent, arrogant
and stubborn people."
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 441:
Narrated Abu Said:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Allah will bring forth the severest Hour, and
then all the Believers, men and women, will prostrate themselves before
Him, but there will remain those who used to prostrate in the world for
showing off and for gaining good reputation. Such people will try to
prostrate (on the Day of Judgment) but their back swill be as stiff as if it is
one bone (a single vertebra)."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 442:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
All the idols which were worshipped by the people of Noah were
worshipped by the Arabs later on. As for the idol Wadd, it was worshipped
by the tribe of Kalb at Daumat-al-Jandal; Suwa' was the idol of (the tribe of)
Murad and then by Ban, Ghutaif at Al-Jurf near Saba; Yauq was the idol of
Hamdan, and Nasr was the idol of Himyr, the branch of Dhi-al-Kala.' The
names (of the idols) formerly belonged to some pious men of the people of
Noah, and when they died Satan inspired their people to (prepare and place
idols at the places where they used to sit, and to call those idols by their
names. The people did so, but the idols were not worshipped till those
people (who initiated them) had died and the origin of the idols had become
obscure, whereupon people began worshipping them.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 443:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Allah's Apostle went out along with a group of his companions towards
'Ukaz Market. At that time something intervened between the devils and
the news of the Heaven, and flames were sent down upon them, so the
devils returned. Their fellow-devils said, "What is wrong with you? " They
said, "Something has intervened between us and the news of the Heaven,
and fires (flames) have been shot at us." Their fellow-devils said, "Nothing
has intervened between you and the news of the Heaven, but an important
event has happened. Therefore, travel all over the world, east and west, and
try to find out what has happened." And so they set out and travelled all
over the world, east and west, looking for that thing which intervened
between them and the news of the Heaven. Those of the devils who had set
out towards Tihama, went to Allah's Apostle at Nakhla (a place between
Mecca and Taif) while he was on his way to Ukaz Market. (They met him)
while he was offering the Fajr prayer with his companions. When they heard
the Holy Qur'an being recited (by Allah's Apostle), they listened to it and
said (to each other). This is the thing which has intervened between you and
the news of the Heavens." Then they returned to their people and said, "O
our people! We have really heard a wonderful recital (Qur'an). It gives
guidance to the right, and we have believed therein. We shall not join in
worship, anybody with our Lord." (See 72.1-2) Then Allah revealed to His
Prophet (Surat al-Jinn):
'Say: It has been revealed to me that a group (3 to 9) of Jinns listened (to
the Qur'an).' (72.1) The statement of the Jinns was revealed to him .

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 444:
Narrated Yahya bin Abi Kathir:
I asked Aba Salama bin 'Abdur-Rahman about the first Sura revealed of the
Qur'an. He replied "O you, wrapped-up (i.e. Al Muddaththir)." I said, "They
say it was, 'Read, in the Name of your Lord Who created,' (i.e. Surat Al-'Alaq
(the Clot)." On that, Abu Salama said, "I asked Jabir bin 'Abdullah about
that, saying the same as you have said, whereupon he said, 'I will not tell you
except what Allah's Apostle had told us. Allah's Apostle said, "I was in
seclusion in the cave of Hiram', and after I completed the limited period of
my seclusion. I came down (from the cave) and heard a voice calling me. I
looked to my right, but saw nothing. Then I looked up and saw something.
So I went to Khadija (the Prophet's wife) and told her to wrap me up and
pour cold water on me. So they wrapped me up and poured cold water on
me." Then, 'O you, (Muhammad) wrapped up! Arise and warn,' (Surat Al
Muddaththir) was revealed." (74.1)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 445:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "I was in a seclusion in the cave of Hira........."(similar to
the narration related by 'Ali bin Al-Mubarak, 444 above).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 446:
Narrated Yahya: I asked Aba Salama, "Which Sura of the Qur'an was
revealed first?" He replied, "O you, wrapped-up' (Al-Muddaththir)." I said, "I
have been informed that it was, 'Read, in the Name of your Lord who
created........ (i.e. Surat Al-Alaq).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 447:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
I heard the Prophet describing the period of pause of the Divine Inspiration.
He said in his talk, "While I was walking, I heard voices from the sky. I looked
up, and behold ! I saw the same Angel who came to me in the cave of Hira'
sitting on a chair between the sky and the earth. I was too much afraid of
him (so I returned to my house) and said, 'Fold me up in garments!' They
wrapped me up. Then Allah revealed: 'O you wrapped...and desert the idols
before the prayer became compulsory.' Rujz means idols.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 448:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
That he heard Allah's Apostle describing the period of pause of the Divine
Inspiration, and in his description he said, "While I was walking I heard 
voice from the sky. I looked up towards the sky, and behold! I saw the same
Angel who came to me in the Cave of Hira', sitting on a chair between the
sky and the earth. I was so terrified by him that I fell down on the ground.
Then I went to my wife and said, 'Wrap me in garments! Wrap me in
garments!' They wrapped me, and then Allah revealed:
"O you, (Muhammad) wrapped-up! Arise and warn...and desert the idols."
(74.1-5) Abu Salama said....Rujz means idols." After that, the Divine
Inspiration started coming more frequently and regularly.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 449:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet used to move his tongue when the divine Inspiration was being
revealed to him. (Sufyan, a subnarrator, demonstrated (how the Prophet
used to move his lips) and added. "In order to memorize it." So Allah
revealed: "Move not your tongue concerning (the Quran) to make haste
therewith." (75.16)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 450:
Narrated Musa bin Abi Aisha:
That he asked Said bin Jubair regarding (the statement of Allah). 'Move not
your tongue concerning (the Quran) to make haste therewith.' He said, "Ibn
'Abbas said that the Prophet used to move his lips when the Divine
Inspiration was being revealed to him. So the Prophet was ordered not to
move his tongue, which he used to do, lest some words should escape his
memory. 'It is for Us to collect it' means, We will collect it in your chest;' and
its recitation' means, We will make you recite it. 'But when We recite it (i.e.
when it is revealed to you), follow its recital; it is for Us to explain it and
make it clear,' (i.e. We will explain it through your tongue).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 451:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
(as regards) Allah's Statement:
"Move not your tongue concerning (the Quran) to make haste therewith."
(75.16)
When Gabriel revealed the Divine Inspiration in Allah's Apostle , he (Allah's
Apostle) moved his tongue and lips, and that state used to be very hard for
him, and that movement indicated that revelation was taking place. So Allah
revealed in Surat Al-Qiyama which begins:
'I do swear by the Day of Resurrection...' (75) the Verses:-'Move not your tongue concerning (the Quran) to make haste therewith. It
is for Us to collect it (Quran) in your mind, and give you the ability to recite it
by heart. (75.16-17) Ibn Abbas added: It is for Us to collect it (Qur'an) (in your
mind), and give you the ability to recite it by heart means, "When We reveal
it, listen. Then it is for Us to explain it," means, 'It is for us to explain it
through your tongue.' So whenever Gabriel came to Allah's Apostle ' he
would keep quiet (and listen), and when the Angel left, the Prophet would
recite that revelation as Allah promised him.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 452:
Narrated Abdullah:
We were with the Prophet when Surat Wal-Mursalat was revealed to him.
While we were receiving it from his mouth, a snake suddenly came and we
ran to kill it, but it outstripped us and entered its hole quickly. Allah's le said,
"It has escaped your evil, and you too, have escaped its evil."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 453:
Narrated Abdullah:
(Similarly--as no. 452 above.)
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 454:
Narrated Abdullah:
While we were with Allah's Apostle in a cave, Surat "Wal Mursalat" was
revealed to him and we received it directly from his mouth as soon as he had
received the revelation. Suddenly a snake came out and Allah's Apostle said,
"Get at it and kill it!" We ran to kill it but it outstripped us. Allah's Apostle
said, "It has escaped your evil, as you too, have escaped its."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 455:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
(as regards the explanation of Hadith 454). 'Indeed, it (Hell) throws about
sparks (huge) as Forts.' We used to collect wood in the form of logs, three
cubits long or shorter. for heating purposes in winter., and we used to call
such wood, the Qasr.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 456:
Narrated Abdullah:
While we were with the Prophet in a cave, Surat wal-Mursalat was revealed
to him and he recited it, and I heard it directly from his mouth as soon as he
recited its revelation. Suddenly a snake sprang at us, and the Prophet said,
"Kill it!" We ran to kill it but it escaped quickly. The Prophet said. "It has
escaped your evil, and you too have escaped its evil."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 457:
Narrated Al--Amash:
Abu Huraira said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'Between the two sounds of the
trumpet, there will be forty." Somebody asked Abu Huraira, "Forty days?
But he refused to reply. Then he asked, "Forty months?" He refused to reply.
Then he asked, "Forty years?" Again, he refused to reply. Abu Huraira added.
"Then (after this period) Allah will send water from the sky and then the
dead bodies will grow like vegetation grows, There is nothing of the human
body that does not decay except one bone; that is the little bone at the end
of the coccyx of which the human body will be recreated on the Day of
Resurrection." (See Hadith No. 338)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 458:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
I saw Allah's Apostle pointing with his index and middle fingers, saying. "The
time of my Advent and the Hour are like these two fingers." The Great
Catastrophe will overwhelm everything.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 459:
Narrated Aisha:
The Prophet said, "Such a person as recites the Quran and masters it by
heart, will be with the noble righteous scribes (in Heaven). And such a
person exerts himself to learn the Quran by heart, and recites it with great
difficulty, will have a double reward."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 460:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
The Prophet said, "On the Day when all mankind will stand before the Lord
of the Worlds, some of them will be enveloped in their sweat up to the
middle of their ears."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 461:
Narrated Aisha:
I heard the Prophet saying...

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 462:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I heard the Prophet saying...

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 463:
Narrated Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said," (On the Day of Resurrection) any one whose account
will be taken will be ruined (i.e. go to Hell)." I said, "O Allah's Apostle! May
Allah make me be sacrificed for you. Doesn't Allah say:
"Then as for him who will be given his record in his right hand, he surely will
receive an easy reckoning.?" (84.7-8) He replied, "That is only the
presentation of the accounts; but he whose record is questioned, will be
ruined."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 464:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
(as regards the Verse):--'You shall surely travel from stage to stage (in this
life and in the Hereafter).' (It means) from one state to another. That
concerns your Prophet.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 465:
Narrated Al-Bara:
The first of the companions of the Prophet who came to us (in Medina),
were Mus'ab bin 'Umar and Ibn Um Maktum, and they started teaching us
the Qur'an. Then came 'Ammar, Bilal and Sad. Afterwards 'Umar bin AlKkattab came along with a batch of twenty (men): and after that the
Prophet came. I never saw the people of Medina so pleased with anything
as they were with his arrival, so that even the little boys and girls were
saying, "This is Allah's Apostle who has come." He (the Prophet ) did not
come (to Medina) till I had learnt Surat Al-Ala and also other similar Suras.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 466:
Narrated Abdullah bin Zama:
That he heard the Prophet delivering a sermon, and he mentioned the
shecamel and the one who hamstrung it. Allah's Apostle recited:-'When, the most wicked man among them went forth (to hamstrung the
she-camel).' (91.12.) Then he said, "A tough man whose equal was rare and
who enjoyed the protection of his people, like Abi Zama went forth to
(hamstrung) it." The Prophet then mentioned about the women (in his
sermon). "It is not wise for anyone of you to lash his wife like a slave, for he
might sleep with her the same evening." Then he advised them not to laugh
when somebody breaks wind and said, "Why should anybody laugh at what
he himself does?"

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 467:
Narrated Alqama:
I went to Sham with a group of the companions of 'Abdullah (bin Mas'ud).
Abu Ad-Darda' heard of our arrival so he came to us and said, "Is there
anybody among you who can recite (Qur'an)" We replied in the affirmative.
Then he asked, "Who is the best reciter?" They pointed at me. Then he told
me to recite, so I recited the verse:--
'By the night as it envelops 'By the day as it appears in brightness; By (Him
Who created) male and the female.' (92.1-3) Abu Ad-Darda' then said to me,
"Did you hear it (like this) from the mouth of your friend ('Abdullah bin
Mas'ud)?" I said, "Yes." He said, "I too, heard it (like this) from the mouth of
the Prophet, but these people do not consider this recitation as the correct
one."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 468:
Narrated Ibrahim:
The companions of 'Abdullah (bin Mas'ud) came to Abu Darda', (and before
they arrived at his home), he looked for them and found them. Then he
asked them,: 'Who among you can recite (Qur'an) as 'Abdullah recites it?"
They replied, "All of us." He asked, "Who among you knows it by heart?"
They pointed at 'Alqama. Then he asked Alqama. "How did you hear
'Abdullah bin Mas'ud reciting Surat Al-Lail (The Night)?" Alqama recited:
'By the male and the female.' Abu Ad-Darda said, "I testify that I heard me
Prophet reciting it likewise, but these people want me to recite it:-'And by Him Who created male and female.' but by Allah, I will not follow
them."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 469:
Narrated 'Ali:
We were in the company of the Prophet in a funeral procession at Baqi AlGharqad. He said, "There is none of you but has his place written for him in
Paradise or in the Hell- Fire." They said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall we depend
(on this fact and give up work)?" He said, "Carry on doing (good deeds), for
every body will find it easy to do (what will lead him to his destined place)."
Then he recited:
'As for him who gives (in charity) and keeps his duty to Allah, and believes in
the Best reward from Allah (i.e. Allah will compensate him for what he will
spend in Allah's way). So, We will make smooth for him the path of ease. But
he who is a greedy miser....for him, the path for evil.' (92.5-10)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 470:
Narrated Abu Abdur-Rahman:
'Ali said, "We were sitting with the Prophet," (He then mentioned the
Hadith above (469).

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 471:
Narrated 'Ali:
While the Prophet was in a funeral procession, he took a small stick and
started scraping the earth with it and said, "There is none among you but
has his place written for him, either in the Hell Fire or in Paradise." They (the
people) said, "Allah's Apostle! Shall we depend on this (and leave work)?"
He replied. "Carry on doing (good deeds), for everybody will find easy (to
do) such deeds as will lead him to his destined place." The Prophet then
recited:-'As for him who gives (in charity) and keeps his duty to Allah, and believes in
the Best Reward.'.....(92.5-10)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 472:
Narrated Ali:
We were in the company of the Prophet and he said, "There is none among
you but has his place written for him, either in Paradise or in the Hell-Fire."
We said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall we depend (on this fact and give up
work)?" He replied, "No! Carry on doing good deeds, for everybody will find
easy (to do) such deeds as will lead him to his destined place." Then the
Prophet recited: 'As for him who gives (in charity) and keeps his duty to
Allah, and believes in the Best reward. We will make smooth for him the
path of ease....the path for evil.' (92.5-10)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 473:
Narrated 'Ali:
While we were in a funeral procession in Baqi Al-Gharqad, Allah's Apostle
came and sat down, and we sat around him. He had a small stick in his hand
and he bent his head and started scraping the ground with it. He then said,
"There is none among you, and no created soul but has his place written for
him either in Paradise or in the Hell-Fire, and also has his happy or miserable
fate (in the Hereafter) written for him." A man said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall
we depend upon what is written for us and give up doing (good) deeds? For
whoever among us is destined to be fortunate (in the Hereafter), will join
the fortunate peoples and whoever among us is destined to be miserable
will do such deeds as are characteristic of the people who are destined to
misery." The Prophet said, "Those who are destined to be happy (in the
Hereafter) will find it easy and pleasant to do the deeds characteristic of
those destined to happiness, while those who are to be among the
miserable (in the Hereafter), will find it easy to do the deeds characteristic
of those destined to misery." Then he recited: 'As for him who gives (in
charity) and keeps his duty to Allah and believes in the Best reward from
Allah, We will make smooth for him the path of ease. But he who is a greedy
miser and thinks himself self sufficient, and gives the lie to the Best reward
from Allah we will make smooth for him the path for evil.' (92.5-10)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 474:
Narrated Ali:
While the Prophet was in a funeral procession. he picked up something and
started scraping the ground with it, and said, "There is none among you but
has his place written for him either in the Hell Fire or in Paradise." They said,
"O Allah's Apostle! Shall we not depend upon what has been written for us
and give up deeds? He said, "Carry on doing (good) deeds, for everybody
will find easy to do such deeds as will lead him to his destined place for
which he has been created. So he who is destined to be among the happy
(in the Hereafter), will find it easy to do the deeds characteristic of such
people, while he who is destined to be among the miserable ones, will find it
easy to do the deeds characteristic of such people." Then he recited:
'As for him who gives (in charity) and fears Allah, and believes in the best....'
(92.5-10)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 475:
Narrated Jundub bin Sufyan:
Once Allah's Apostle became sick and could not offer his night prayer
(Tahajjud) for two or three nights. Then a lady (the wife of Abu Lahab) came
and said, "O Muhammad! I think that your Satan has forsaken you, for I have
not seen him with you for two or three nights!" On that Allah revealed:
'By the fore-noon, and by the night when it darkens, your Lord (O
Muhammad) has neither forsaken you, nor hated you.' (93.1-3)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 476:
Narrated Jundub Al-Bajali:
A lady said, "O Allah's Apostle! I see that your friend has delayed. (in
conveying Quran) to you." So there was revealed: 'Your Lord (O
Muhammad) has neither forsaken you, not hated you.' (93.1-3)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 477:
Narrated Al-Bara:
While the Prophet was on a journey, he recited Surat At-Tini waz-Zaituni (95)
in one of the first two Rakat of the Isha prayer.
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 478:
Narrated Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) The commencement (of the Divine Inspiration) to
Allah's Apostle was in the form of true dreams in his sleep, for he never had
a dream but it turned out to be true and clear as the bright daylight. Then he
began to like seclusions, so he used to go in seclusion in the cave of Hira
where he used to worship Allah continuously for many nights before going
back to his family to take the necessary provision (of food) for the stay. He
come back to (his wife) Khadija again to take his provision (of food)
likewise, till one day he received the Guidance while he was in the cave of
Hira. An Angel came to him and asked him to read. Allah's Apostle replied, "I
do not know how to read." The Prophet added, "Then the Angel held me
(forcibly) and pressed me so hard that I felt distressed. Then he released me
and again asked me to read, and I replied, 'I do not know how to read.'
Thereupon he held me again and pressed me for the second time till I felt
distressed. He then released me and asked me to read, but again I replied. 'I
do not know how to read.' Thereupon he held me for the third time and
pressed me till I got distressed, and then he released me and said, 'Read, in
the Name of your Lord Who has created (all that exists), has created man
out of a clot, Read! And your Lord is the Most Generous. Who has taught
(the writing) by the pen, has taught man that which he knew not." (96.1-5).
Then Allah's Apostle returned with that experience; and the muscles
between his neck and shoulders were trembling till he came upon Khadija
(his wife) and said, "Cover me!" They covered him, and when the state of
fear was over, he said to Khadija, "O Khadija! What is wrong with me? I was
afraid that something bad might happen to me." Then he told her the story.
Khadija said, "Nay! But receive the good tidings! By Allah, Allah will never
disgrace you, for by Allah, you keep good relations with your Kith and kin,
speak the truth, help the poor and the destitute, entertain your guests
generously and assist those who are stricken with calamities." Khadija then
took him to Waraqa bin Naufil, the son of Khadija's paternal uncle. Waraqa
had been converted to Christianity in the Pre-lslamic Period and used to
write Arabic and write of the Gospel in Arabic as much as Allah wished him
to write. He was an old man and had lost his eyesight. Khadija said (to
Waraqa), "O my cousin! Listen to what your nephew is going to say."
Waraqa said, "O my nephew! What have you seen?" The Prophet then
described whatever he had seen. Waraqa said, "This is the same Angel
(Gabriel) who was sent to Moses. I wish I were young." He added some
other statement. Allah's Apostle asked, "Will these people drive me out?"
Waraqa said, "Yes, for nobody brought the like of what you have brought,
but was treated with hostility. If I were to remain alive till your day (when
you start preaching). then I would support you strongly." But a short while
later Waraqa died and the Divine Inspiration was paused (stopped) for a
while so that Allah's Apostle was very much grieved.
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: While Allah's Apostle was talking about the
period of pause in revelation. he said in his narration. "Once while I was
walking, all of a sudden I heard a voice from the sky. I looked up and saw to
my surprise, the same Angel as had visited me in the cave of Hira.' He was
sitting on a chair between the sky and the earth. I got afraid of him and
came back home and said, Wrap me! Wrap me!" So they covered him and
then Allah revealed:
'O you, wrapped up! Arise and warn and your Lord magnify, and your
garments purify and dessert the idols.' (74.1-5)
Abu Salama said, "(Rijz) are the idols which the people of the Pre-lslamic
period used to worship." After this the revelation started coming frequently
and regularly.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 479:
Narrated Aisha:
The commencement of the Divine Inspiration to Allah's Apostle was in the
form of true dreams. The Angel came to him and said, "Read, in the Name of
your Lord Who has created (all that exists), has created man a clot. Read!
And your Lord is Most Generous" ..(96.1,2,3)
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 480:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The commencement of (the Divine Inspirations to) Allah's Apostle was in the
form of true dreams. The Angel came to him and said, "Read! In the Name of
your Lord Who has created all exists), has created man from a clot. Read!
And your Lord is Most Generous, Who has taught (the writing) by the pen
(the first person to write was Prophet Idris. (96.1-4)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 481:
Narrated Aisha:
The Prophet returned to Khadija and said, "Wrap me! Wrap me!" (Then the
sub-narrator narrated the rest of the narration.)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 482:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Abu Jahl said, "If I see Muhammad praying at the Ka'ba, I will tread on his
neck." When the Prophet heard of that, he said, "If he does so, the Angels
will snatch him away."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 483:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said to Ubai (bin Ka'b). "Allah has ordered me to recite to you:-'Those who disbelieve among the people of the Scripture and among the
idolators are not going to stop (from their disbelief.') (Sura 98) Ubai said,
"Did Allah mention me by name?" The Prophet said, "Yes." On that, Ubai
wept.
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 484:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said to Ubai, "Allah has ordered me recite Quran to you." Ubai
asked, "Did Allah mention me by name to you?" The Prophet said, "Allah has
mentioned your name to me." On that Ubai started weeping. (The subnarrator) Qatada added: I have been informed that the Prophet recited:
'Those who disbelieve among the people of the Scripture," ...to Ubai.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 485:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Prophet said to Ubai bin Ka'b, "Allah has ordered me to recite Quran
to you." Ubai said, "Did Allah mention me by name to you?" The Prophet
said, "Yes." Ubai said, "Have I been mentioned by the Lord of the Worlds?"
The Prophet said, "Yes." Then Ubai burst into tears.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 486:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, " Horses are kept for one of three purposes: A man may
keep them (for Allah's Cause) to receive a reward in the Hereafter; another
may keep them as a means of protection; and a third may keep them to be a
burden for him. As for the man for whom the horse is a source of reward, he
is the one who ties it for Allah's Cause, and he ties it with a long rope in a
pasture or a garden, then, whatever it eats or drinks in that pasture or
garden will be added to his good deeds. And if it breaks its rope and jumps
over one or two hills, then, for all its footsteps and its manure, good deeds
will be written for him. And if it passes by a river and drinks of its water
though its owner had no intention to water it from that river, even then he
will have good deeds written for him. So that horse will be (a source of)
reward for such a man.
If a man ties a horse for earning his livelihood and abstaining from asking
others for help and he does not forget Allah's right, i.e. pays its Zakat and
gives it to be used in Allah's Cause, then that horse will be a means of
protection for him. But if a man ties it out of pride and to show off and to
excite others, then that horse will be a burden (of sins) for him." Then
Allah's Apostle was asked regarding donkeys. He replied, "Nothing has been
revealed to me except this comprehensive Verse which includes everything:
'So whoever does good equal to the weight of an atom (or a smallest ant)
shall see it; and whoever does evil equal to the weight of an atom (or a
smallest ant) shall see it.' (99.7-8)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 487:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet was asked about donkeys and he replied, "Nothing has been
revealed to me regarding donkeys except this comprehensive Verse which
includes everything:
"So whoever does good equal to the weight of an atom (or a smallest ant)
shall see it; And whoever, does evil equal to the weight of an atom or a
smallest ant) shall see it.' (99.7-8)

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 488:
Narrated Anas:
When the Prophet was made to ascend to the Heavens, he said (after his
return), "I came upon a river the banks of which were made of tents of
hollow pearls. I asked Gabriel. What is this (river?' He replied, 'This is the
Kauthar.'

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 489:
Narrated Abu Ubaida:
I asked 'Aisha 'regarding the verse:--'Verily we have granted you the
Kauthar.' She replied, "The Kauthar is a river which has been given to your
Prophet on the banks of which there are (tents of) hollow pearls and its
utensils are as numberless as the stars."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 490:
Narrated Abu Bishr:
Said bin Jubair said that Ibn 'Abbas said about Al-Kauthar. "That is the good
which Allah has bestowed upon His Apostle." I said to Sa'id bin Jubair. "But
the people claim that it is a river in Paradise." Said said, "The river in Paradise
is part of the good which Allah has bestowed on His Apostle."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 491:
Narrated Aisha:
"When the "Surat-An-Nasr", 'When comes the Help of Allah and the
conquest,' had been revealed to the Prophet he did not offer any prayer
except that he said therein, "Subhanka Rabbana wa bihamdika; Allahumma
ighfirli (I testify the Uniqueness of our Lord, and all the praises are for Him:
O Allah, forgive me!")

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 492:
Narrated Aisha:
Allah's Apostle used to say very often in bowing and prostration (during his
prayers), Subhanka Allahumma Rabbana wa bihamdika; Allahumma ighfirli,"
according to the order of the Qur'an.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 493:
Narrated Ibn Abbas
'Umar asked the people regarding Allah's Statement:
'When comes the Help of Allah (to you O Muhammad against your enemies)
and the conquest of Mecca.' (110.1) They replied, "It indicates the future
conquest of towns and palaces (by Muslims)." 'Umar said, "What do you say
about it, O Ibn 'Abbas?" I replied, "(This Surat) indicates the termination of
the life of Muhammad. Through it he was informed of the nearness of his
death."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 494:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
'Umar used to make me sit with the elderly men who had fought in the
Battle of Badr. Some of them felt it (did not like that) and said to 'Umar
"Why do you bring in this boy to sit with us while we have sons like him?"
Umar replied, "Because of what you know of his position (i.e. his religious
knowledge.)" One day 'Umar called me and made me sit in the gathering of
those people; and I think that he called me just to show them. (my religious
knowledge). 'Umar then asked them (in my presence). "What do you say
about the interpretation of the Statement of Allah:
'When comes Help of Allah (to you O, Muhammad against your enemies)
and the conquest (of Mecca).' (110.1) Some of them said, "We are ordered to
praise Allah and ask for His forgiveness when Allah's Help and the conquest
(of Mecca) comes to us." Some others kept quiet and did not say anything.
On that, 'Umar asked me, "Do you say the same, O Ibn 'Abbas?" I replied,
"No." He said, 'What do you say then?" I replied, "That is the sign of the
death of Allah's Apostle which Allah informed him of. Allah said:-'(O Muhammad) When comes the Help of Allah (to you against your
enemies) and the conquest (of Mecca) (which is the sign of your death). You
should celebrate the praises of your Lord and ask for His Forgiveness, and
He is the One Who accepts the repentance and forgives.' (110.3) On that
'Umar said, "I do not know anything about it other than what you have
said."
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 495:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
When the Verse:-- 'And warn your tribe of near kindred.' (26.214) was
revealed. Allah's Apostle went out, and when he had ascended As-Safa
mountain, he shouted, "O Sabahah!" The people said, "Who is that?" "Then
they gathered around him, whereupon he said, "Do you see? If I inform you
that cavalrymen are proceeding up the side of this mountain, will you
believe me?" They said, "We have never heard you telling a lie." Then he
said, "I am a plain warner to you of a coming severe punishment." Abu
Lahab said, "May you perish! You gathered us only for this reason? " Then
Abu Lahab went away. So the "Surat:--ul--LAHAB" 'Perish the hands of Abu
Lahab!' (111.1) was revealed.

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 496:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet went out towards Al-Batha' and ascended the mountain and
shouted, "O Sabahah!" So the Quraish people gathered around him. He said,
"Do you see? If I tell you that an enemy is going to attack you in the morning
or in the evening, will you believe me?" They replied, "Yes." He said, "Then I
am a plain warner to you of a coming severe punishment." Abu Lahab said,
"Is it for this reason that you have gathered us? May you perish ! " Then
Allah revealed: 'Perish the hands of Abu Lahab!'

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 497:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Abu Lahab said, "May you perish! Is it' for this that you have gathered us?"
So there was revealed:-- 'Parish the hands of Abu Lahab'
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 498:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah said: 'The son of Adam tells a lie against Me,,
though he hasn't the right to do so. He abuses me though he hasn't the
right to do so. As for his telling a lie against Me, it is his saying that I will not
recreate him as I created him for the first time. In fact, the first creation was
not easier for Me than new creation. As for his abusing Me, it is his saying
that Allah has begotten children, while I am the One, the Self-Sufficient
Master Whom all creatures need, I beget not, nor was I begotten, and there
is none like unto Me."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 499:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah said:-- 'The son of Adam tells a lie against Me and
he hasn't the right to do so; and he abuses me and he hasn't the right to do
so. His telling a lie against Me is his saying that I will not recreate him as I
created him for the first time; and his abusing Me is his saying that Allah has
begotten children, while I am the self-sufficient Master, Whom all creatures
need, Who begets not nor was He begotten, and there is none like unto
Me."

Volume 6, Book 60, Number 500:
Narrated Zirr bin Hubaish:
I asked Ubai bin Ka'b regarding the two Muwwidhat (Surats of taking refuge
with Allah). He said, "I asked the Prophet about them, He said, 'These two
Surats have been recited to me and I have recited them (and are present in
the Quran).' So, we say as Allah's Apostle said (i.e., they are part of the
Quran"
Volume 6, Book 60, Number 501:
Narrated Zirr bin Hubaish:
I asked Ubai bin Ka'b, "O Abu AlMundhir! Your brother, Ibn Mas'ud said soand-so (i.e., the two Mu'awwidh-at do not belong to the Quran)." Ubai said,
"I asked Allah's Apostle about them, and he said, 'They have been revealed
to me, and I have recited them (as a part of the Quran)," So Ubai added, "So
we say as Allah's Apostle has said."
BOOK 61. VIRTUES OF THE QUR'AN (502-582)
Volume 6, Book 61, Number 502:
Narrated 'Aisha and Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet remained in Mecca for ten years, during which the Qur'an used
to be revealed to him; and he stayed in Medina for ten years.

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 503:
Narrated Abu 'Uthman:
I was informed that Gabriel came to the Prophet while Um Salama was with
him. Gabriel started talking (to the Prophet). Then the Prophet asked Um
Salama, "Who is this?" She replied, "He is Dihya (al-Kalbi)." When Gabriel had
left, Um Salama said, "By Allah, I did not take him for anybody other than
him (i.e. Dihya) till I heard the sermon of the Prophet wherein he informed
about the news of Gabriel." The subnarrator asked Abu 'Uthman: From
whom have you heard that? Abu 'Uthman said: From Usama bin Zaid.

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 504:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Every Prophet was given miracles because of which
people believed, but what I have been given, is Divine Inspiration which
Allah has revealed to me. So I hope that my followers will outnumber the
followers of the other Prophets on the Day of Resurrection."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 505:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah sent down His Divine Inspiration to His Apostle continuously and
abundantly during the period preceding his death till He took him unto Him.
That was the period of the greatest part of revelation; and Allah's Apostle
died after that.

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 506:
Narrated Jundub:
Once the Prophet fell ill and did not offer the night prayer (Tahajjud prayer)
for a night or two. A woman (the wife of Abu Lahab) came to him and said,
"O Muhammad ! I do not see but that your Satan has left you." Then Allah
revealed (Surat-Ad-Duha):
'By the fore-noon, and by the night when it darkens (or is still); Your Lord
has not forsaken you, nor hated you.' (93)

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 507:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
(The Caliph 'Uthman ordered Zaid bin Thabit, Said bin Al-As, 'Abdullah bin
Az-Zubair and 'Abdur-Rahman bin Al-Harith bin Hisham to write the Quran in
the form of a book (Mushafs) and said to them. "In case you disagree with
Zaid bin Thabit (Al-Ansari) regarding any dialectic Arabic utterance of the
Quran, then write it in the dialect of Quraish, for the Quran was revealed in
this dialect." So they did it.

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 508:
Narrated Safwan bin Ya'la bin Umaiya:
Ya'la used to say, "I wish I could see Allah's Apostle at the time he is being
inspired Divinely." When the Prophet was at Al-Ja'rana and was shaded by a
garment hanging over him and some of his companions were with him, a
man perfumed with scent came and said, "O Allah's Apostle! What is your
opinion regarding a man who assumes Ihram and puts on a cloak after
perfuming his body with scent?" The Prophet waited for a while, and then
the Divine Inspiration descended upon him. 'Umar pointed out to Ya'la,
telling him to come. Ya'la came and pushed his head (underneath the screen
which was covering the Prophet ) and behold! The Prophet's face was red
and he kept on breathing heavily for a while and then he was relieved.
Thereupon he said, "Where is the questioner who asked me about 'Umra a
while ago?" The man was sought and then was brought before the Prophet
who said (to him), "As regards the scent which you perfumed your body
with, you must wash it off thrice, and as for your cloak, you must take it off;
and then perform in your 'Umra all those things which you perform in Hajj."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 509:
Narrated Zaid bin Thabit:
Abu Bakr As-Siddiq sent for me when the people! of Yamama had been killed
(i.e., a number of the Prophet's Companions who fought against
Musailama). (I went to him) and found 'Umar bin Al-Khattab sitting with
him. Abu Bakr then said (to me), "Umar has come to me and said:
"Casualties were heavy among the Qurra' of the! Qur'an (i.e. those who
knew the Quran by heart) on the day of the Battle of Yalmama, and I am
afraid that more heavy casualties may take place among the Qurra' on other
battlefields, whereby a large part of the Qur'an may be lost. Therefore I
suggest, you (Abu Bakr) order that the Qur'an be collected." I said to 'Umar,
"How can you do something which Allah's Apostle did not do?" 'Umar said,
"By Allah, that is a good project. "Umar kept on urging me to accept his
proposal till Allah opened my chest for it and I began to realize the good in
the idea which 'Umar had realized." Then Abu Bakr said (to me). 'You are a
wise young man and we do not have any suspicion about you, and you used
to write the Divine Inspiration for Allah's Apostle. So you should search for
(the fragmentary scripts of) the Qur'an and collect it in one book)." By Allah
If they had ordered me to shift one of the mountains, it would not have
been heavier for me than this ordering me to collect the Qur'an. Then I said
to Abu Bakr, "How will you do something which Allah's Apostle did not do?"
Abu Bakr replied, "By Allah, it is a good project." Abu Bakr kept on urging
me to accept his idea until Allah opened my chest for what He had opened
the chests of Abu Bakr and 'Umar. So I started looking for the Qur'an and
collecting it from (what was written on) palmed stalks, thin white stones
and also from the men who knew it by heart, till I found the last Verse of
Surat At-Tauba (Repentance) with Abi Khuzaima Al-Ansari, and I did not find
it with anybody other than him. The Verse is:
'Verily there has come unto you an Apostle (Muhammad) from amongst
yourselves. It grieves him that you should receive any injury or difficulty..(till
the end of Surat-Baraa' (At-Tauba) (9.128-129) Then the complete
manuscripts (copy) of the Qur'an remained with Abu Bakr till he died, then
with 'Umar till the end of his life, and then with Hafsa, the daughter of
'Umar.

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 510:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Hudhaifa bin Al-Yaman came to Uthman at the time when the people of
Sham and the people of Iraq were Waging war to conquer Arminya and
Adharbijan. Hudhaifa was afraid of their (the people of Sham and Iraq)
differences in the recitation of the Qur'an, so he said to 'Uthman, "O chief of
the Believers! Save this nation before they differ about the Book (Quran) as
Jews and the Christians did before." So 'Uthman sent a message to Hafsa
saying, "Send us the manuscripts of the Qur'an so that we may compile the
Qur'anic materials in perfect copies and return the manuscripts to you."
Hafsa sent it to 'Uthman. 'Uthman then ordered Zaid bin Thabit, 'Abdullah
bin AzZubair, Said bin Al-As and 'AbdurRahman bin Harith bin Hisham to
rewrite the manuscripts in perfect copies. 'Uthman said to the three
Quraishi men, "In case you disagree with Zaid bin Thabit on any point in the
Qur'an, then write it in the dialect of Quraish, the Qur'an was revealed in
their tongue." They did so, and when they had written many copies,
'Uthman returned the original manuscripts to Hafsa. 'Uthman sent to every
Muslim province one copy of what they had copied, and ordered that all the
other Qur'anic materials, whether written in fragmentary manuscripts or
whole copies, be burnt. Said bin Thabit added, "A Verse from Surat Ahzab
was missed by me when we copied the Qur'an and I used to hear Allah's
Apostle reciting it. So we searched for it and found it with Khuzaima bin
Thabit Al-Ansari. (That Verse was): 'Among the Believers are men who have
been true in their covenant with Allah.' (33.23)

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 511:
Narrated Zaid bin Thabit:
Abu Bakr sent for me and said, "You used to write the Divine Revelations for
Allah's Apostle : So you should search for (the Qur'an and collect) it." I
started searching for the Qur'an till I found the last two Verses of Surat AtTauba with Abi Khuzaima Al-Ansari and I could not find these Verses with
anybody other than him. (They were):
'Verily there has come unto you an Apostle (Muhammad) from amongst
yourselves. It grieves him that you should receive any injury or difficulty ...'
(9.128-129)

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 512:
Narrated Al-Bara:
There was revealed: 'Not equal are those believers who sit (at home) and
those who strive and fight in the Cause of Allah.' (4.95)
The Prophet said, "Call Zaid for me and let him bring the board, the inkpot
and the scapula bone (or the scapula bone and the ink pot)."' Then he said,
"Write: 'Not equal are those Believers who sit..", and at that time 'Amr bin
Um Maktum, the blind man was sitting behind the Prophet . He said, "O
Allah's Apostle! What is your order For me (as regards the above Verse) as I
am a blind man?" So, instead of the above Verse, the following Verse was
revealed:
'Not equal are those believers who sit (at home) except those who are
disabled (by injury or are blind or lame etc.) and those who strive and fight
in the cause of Allah.' (4.95)

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 513:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle said, "Gabriel recited the Qur'an to me in one way. Then I
requested him (to read it in another way), and continued asking him to
recite it in other ways, and he recited it in several ways till he ultimately
recited it in seven different ways."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 514:
Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:
I heard Hisham bin Hakim reciting Surat Al-Furqan during the lifetime of
Allah's Apostle and I listened to his recitation and noticed that he recited in
several different ways which Allah's Apostle had not taught me. I was about
to jump over him during his prayer, but I controlled my temper, and when he
had completed his prayer, I put his upper garment around his neck and
seized him by it and said, "Who taught you this Sura which I heard you
reciting?" He replied, "Allah's Apostle taught it to me." I said, "You have told
a lie, for Allah's Apostle has taught it to me in a different way from yours."
So I dragged him to Allah's Apostle and said (to Allah's Apostle),
"I heard this person reciting Surat Al-Furqan in a way which you haven't
taught me!" On that Allah's Apostle said, "Release him, (O 'Umar!) Recite, O
Hisham!" Then he recited in the same way as I heard him reciting. Then
Allah's Apostle said, "It was revealed in this way," and added, "Recite, O
'Umar!" I recited it as he had taught me. Allah's Apostle then said, "It was
revealed in this way. This Qur'an has been revealed to be recited in seven
different ways, so recite of it whichever (way) is easier for you (or read as
much of it as may be easy for you)."
Volume 6, Book 61, Number 515:
Narrated Yusuf bin Mahk:
While I was with Aisha, the mother of the Believers, a person from Iraq came
and asked, "What type of shroud is the best?" 'Aisha said, "May Allah be
merciful to you! What does it matter?" He said, "O mother of the Believers!
Show me (the copy of) your Qur'an," She said, "Why?" He said, "In order to
compile and arrange the Qur'an according to it, for people recite it with its
Suras not in proper order." 'Aisha said, "What does it matter which part of it
you read first? (Be informed) that the first thing that was revealed thereof
was a Sura from Al-Mufassal, and in it was mentioned Paradise and the Fire.
When the people embraced Islam, the Verses regarding legal and illegal
things were revealed. If the first thing to be revealed was: 'Do not drink
alcoholic drinks.' people would have said, 'We will never leave alcoholic
drinks,' and if there had been revealed, 'Do not commit illegal sexual
intercourse, 'they would have said, 'We will never give up illegal sexual
intercourse.' While I was a young girl of playing age, the following Verse was
revealed in Mecca to Muhammad: 'Nay! But the Hour is their appointed time
(for their full recompense), and the Hour will be more grievous and more
bitter.' (54.46) Sura Al-Baqara (The Cow) and Surat An-Nisa (The Women)
were revealed while I was with him." Then 'Aisha took out the copy of the
Qur'an for the man and dictated to him the Verses of the Suras (in their
proper order) .

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 516:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud:
Surat Bani-lsrael, Al-Kahf (The Cave), Maryam, Taha, Al-Anbiya' (The
prophets) are amongst my first earnings and my old property, and (in fact)
they are my old property.

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 517:
Narrated Al-Bara':
I learnt, 'Glorify the Name of your Lord the Most High' (Surat al-A'la) No 87,
before the Prophet came (to Medina) .

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 518:
Narrated Shaqiq:
Abdullah said, "I learnt An-Naza'ir which the Prophet used to recite in pairs
in each Rak'a." Then Abdullah got up and Alqama accompanied him to his
house, and when Alqama came out, we asked him (about those Suras). He
said, "They are twenty Suras that start from the beginning of Al-Mufassal,
according to the arrangement done be Ibn Mas'ud, and end with the Suras
starting with Ha Mim, e.g. Ha Mim (the Smoke). and "About what they
question one another?" (78.1)

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 519:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet was the most generous person, and he used to become more
so (generous) particularly in the month of Ramadan because Gabriel used to
meet him every night of the month of Ramadan till it elapsed. Allah's
Apostle used to recite the Qur'an for him. When Gabriel met him, he used to
become more generous than the fast wind in doing good.

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 520:
Narrated Abu-Huraira: Gabriel used to repeat the recitation of the Qur'an
with the Prophet once a year, but he repeated it twice with him in the year
he died. The Prophet used to stay in I'tikaf for ten days every year (in the
month of Ramadan), but
Volume 6, Book 61, Number 521:
Narrated Masriq:
'Abdullah bin 'Amr mentioned 'Abdullah bin Masud and said, "I shall ever
love that man, for I heard the Prophet saying, 'Take (learn) the Qur'an from
four: 'Abdullah bin Masud, Salim, Mu'adh and Ubai bin Ka'b.' "

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 522:
Narrated Shaqiq bin Salama:
Once 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud delivered a sermon before us and said, "By Allah,
I learnt over seventy Suras direct from Allah's Apostle . By Allah, the
companions of the Prophet came to know that I am one of those who know
Allah's Book best of all of them, yet I am not the best of them." Shaqiq
added: I sat in his religious gathering and I did not hear anybody opposing
him (in his speech).

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 523:
Narrated 'Alqama:
While we were in the city of Hims (in Syria), Ibn Mas'ud recited Surat Yusuf.
A man said to him), "It was not revealed in this way." Then Ibn Mas'ud said,
"I recited it in this way before Allah's Apostle and he confirmed my
recitation by saying, 'Well done!' " Ibn Mas'ud detected the smell of wine
from the man's mouth, so he said to him, "Aren't you ashamed of telling a lie
about Allah's Book and (along with this) you drink alcoholic liquors too?"
Then he lashed him according to the law.

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 524:
Narrated 'Abdullah (bin Mas'ud) : By Allah other than Whom none has the
right to be worshipped! There is no Sura revealed in Allah's Book but I know
at what place it was revealed; and there is no Verse revealed in Allah's Book
but I know about whom

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 525:
Narrated Qatada:
I asked Anas bin Malik: "Who collected the Qur'an at the time of the Prophet
?" He replied, "Four, all of whom were from the Ansar: Ubai bin Ka'b,
Mu'adh bin Jabal, Zaid bin Thabit and Abu Zaid."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 526:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
When the Prophet died, none had collected the Qur'an but four persons;:
Abu Ad-Darda'. Mu'adh bin Jabal, Zaid bin Thabit and Abu Zaid. We were the
inheritor (of Abu Zaid) as he had no offspring .

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 527:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 'Umar said, Ubai was the best of us in the recitation (of
the Qur'an) yet we leave some of what he recites.' Ubai says, 'PI have taken
it from the mouth of Allah's Apostle and will not leave for anything
whatever." But Allah said

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 528:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Mu'alla:
While I was praying, the Prophet called me but I did not respond to his call.
Later I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I was praying." He said, "Didn't Allah say: 'O
you who believe! Give your response to Allah (by obeying Him) and to His
Apostle when he calls you'?" (8.24)
He then said, "Shall I not teach you the most superior Surah in the Qur'an?"
He said, '(It is),
'Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds. ' (i.e., Surat Al-Fatiha) which
consists of seven repeatedly recited Verses and the Magnificent Qur'an
which was given to me."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 529:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
While we were on one of our journeys, we dismounted at a place where a
slave girl came and said, "The chief of this tribe has been stung by a scorpion
and our men are not present; is there anybody among you who can treat
him (by reciting something)?" Then one of our men went along with her
though we did not think that he knew any such treatment. But he treated
the chief by reciting something, and the sick man recovered whereupon he
gave him thirty sheep and gave us milk to drink (as a reward). When he
returned, we asked our friend, "Did you know how to treat with the
recitation of something?" He said, "No, but I treated him only with the
recitation of the Mother of the Book (i.e., Al-Fatiha)." We said, "Do not say
anything (about it) till we reach or ask the Prophet so when we reached
Medina, we mentioned that to the Prophet (in order to know whether the
sheep which we had taken were lawful to take or not). The Prophet said,
"How did he come to know that it (Al-Fatiha) could be used for treatment?
Distribute your reward and assign for me one share thereof as well."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 530:
Narrated Abu Mas'ud:
The Prophet said, "If somebody recited the last two Verses of Surat AlBaqara at night, that will be sufficient for him."
Narrated Abu Huraira: Allah 's Apostle ordered me to guard the Zakat
revenue of Ramadan. Then somebody came to me and started stealing of
the foodstuff. I caught him and said, "I will take you to Allah's Apostle!"
Then Abu Huraira described the whole narration and said:) That person said
(to me), "(Please don't take me to Allah's Apostle and I will tell you a few
words by which Allah will benefit you.) When you go to your bed, recite
Ayat-al-Kursi, (2.255) for then there will be a guard from Allah who will
protect you all night long, and Satan will not be able to come near you till
dawn." (When the Prophet heard the story) he said (to me), "He (who came
to you at night) told you the truth although he is a liar; and it was Satan."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 531:
Narrated Al-Bara':
A man was reciting Surat Al-Kahf and his horse was tied with two ropes
beside him. A cloud came down and spread over that man, and it kept on
coming closer and closer to him till his horse started jumping (as if afraid of
something). When it was morning, the man came to the Prophet, and told
him of that experience. The Prophet said, "That was As-Sakina (tranquility)
which descended because of (the recitation of) the Qur'an."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 532:
Narrated Aslam:
Allah's Apostle was traveling on one of his journeys, and 'Umar bin AlKhattab was traveling along with him at night. 'Umar asked him about
something, but Allah's Apostle I did not answer him. He asked again, but he
did not answer. He asked for the third time!, but he did not answer. On that,
'Umar said to himself, "May your mother lose you! You have asked Allah's
Apostle three times, but he did not answer at all!" Umar said, "So I made my
camel go fast till I was ahead of the people, and I was afraid that something
might be! revealed about me. After a little while I heard a call maker calling
me, I said, 'I was afraid that some Qur'anic Verse might be revealed about
me.' So I went to Allah's Apostle and greeted him. He said, 'Tonight there
has been revealed to me a Surah which is dearer to me than that on which
the sun shines (i.e. the world).' Then he recited: 'Verily! We have given you
(O Muhammad I, a manifest victory.' " (Surat al-Fath) No. (48.1).

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 533:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
A man heard another man reciting (Surat-Al-Ikhlas) 'Say He is Allah, (the)
One.' (112. 1) repeatedly. The next morning he came to Allah's Apostle and
informed him about it as if he thought that it was not enough to recite. On
that Allah's Apostle said, "By Him in Whose Hand my life is, this Surah is
equal to one-third of the Qur'an!"
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: My brother, Qatada bin An-Nau'man said, "A
man performed the night prayer late at night in the lifetime of the Prophet
and he read: 'Say: He is Allah, (the) One,' (112.1) and read nothing besides
that. The next morning a man went to the Prophet ,~ and told him about
that . (The Prophet replied the same as (in Hadith 532) above.)

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 534:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said to his companions, "Is it difficult for any of you to recite
one third of the Qur'an in one night?" This suggestion was difficult for them
so they said, "Who among us has the power to do so, O Allah's Apostle?"
Allah Apostle replied: " Allah (the) One, the Self-Sufficient Master Whom all
creatures need.' (Surat Al-Ikhlas 112.1--to the End) is equal to one third of the
Qur'an."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 535:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Whenever Allah's Apostle became sick, he would recite Mu'awwidhat (Surat
Al-Falaq and Surat An-Nas) and then blow his breath over his body. When he
became seriously ill, I used to recite (these two Suras) and rub his hands
over his body hoping for its blessings.

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 536:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Whenever thy Prophet go went to bed every night, he used to cup his hands
together and blow over it after reciting Surat Al-Ikhlas, Surat Al-Falaq and
Surat An-Nas, and then rub his hands over whatever parts of his body he
was able to rub, starting with his head, face and front of his body. He used
to do that three times.

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 536t:
Narrated Usaid bin Hudair:
That while he was reciting Surat Al-Baqara (The Cow) at night, and his horse
was tied beside him, the horse was suddenly startled and troubled. When he
stopped reciting, the horse became quiet, and when he started again, the
horse was startled again. Then he stopped reciting and the horse became
quiet too. He started reciting again and the horse was startled and troubled
once again. Then he stopped reciting and his son, Yahya was beside the
horse. He was afraid that the horse might trample on him. When he took the
boy away and looked towards the sky, he could not see it. The next morning
he informed the Prophet who said, "Recite, O Ibn Hudair! Recite, O Ibn
Hudair!" Ibn Hudair replied, "O Allah's Apostle! My son, Yahya was near the
horse and I was afraid that it might trample on him, so I looked towards the
sky, and went to him. When I looked at the sky, I saw something like a cloud
containing what looked like lamps, so I went out in order not to see it." The
Prophet said, "Do you know what that was?" Ibn Hudair replied, "No." The
Prophet said, "Those were Angels who came near to you for your voice and
if you had kept on reciting till dawn, it would have remained there till
morning when people would have seen it as it would not have disappear
Volume 6, Book 61, Number 537:
Narrated 'Abdul 'Aziz bin Rufai':
Shaddad bin Ma'qil and I entered upon Ibn 'Abbas. Shaddad bin Ma'qil asked
him, "Did the Prophet leave anything (besides the Qur'an)?" He replied. "He
did not leave anything except what is Between the two bindings (of the
Qur'an)." Then we visited Muhammad bin Al-Hanafiyya and asked him (the
same question). He replied, "The Prophet did not leave except what is
between the bindings (of the Qur'an)."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 538:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari:
The Prophet said, "The example of him (a believer) who recites the Qur'an is
like that of a citron which tastes good and smells good. And he (a believer)
who does not recite the Qur'an is like a date which is good in taste but has
no smell. And the example of a dissolute wicked person who recites the
Qur'an is like the Raihana (sweet basil) which smells good but tastes bitter.
And the example of a dissolute wicked person who does not recite the
Qur'an is like the colocynth which tastes bitter and has no smell.

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 539:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "Your life in comparison to the lifetime of the past nations
is like the period between the time of 'Asr prayer and sunset. Your example
and the example of the Jews and Christians is that of person who employed
laborers and said to them, "Who will work for me till the middle of the day
for one Qirat (a special weight)?' The Jews did. He then said, "Who will work
for me from the middle of the day till the 'Asr prayer for one Qirat each?"
The Christians worked accordingly. Then you (Muslims) are working from
the bar prayer till the Maghrib prayer for two Qirats each. They (the Jews
and the Christians) said, 'We did more labor but took less wages.' He (Allah)
said, 'Have I wronged you in your rights?' They replied, 'No.' Then He said,
'This is My Blessing which I give to whom I wish."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 540:
Narrated Talha:
I asked 'Abdullah bin Abi 'Aufa, "Did the Prophet make a will (to appoint his
successor or bequeath wealth)?" He replied, "No." I said, "How is it
prescribed then for the people to make wills, and they are ordered to do so
while the Prophet did not make any will?" He said, "He made a will wherein
he recommended Allah's Book."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 541:
Narrated Abu Huraira: Allah's Apostle said, "Allah does not listen to a
prophet as He listens to a prophet who recites the Qur'an in a pleasant
tone." The companion of the sub-narrator (Abu Salama) said, "It means,
reciting it aloud."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 542:
Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet I said, "Allah does not listen to a prophet
as He listens to a prophet who recites the Qur'an in a loud and pleasant
tone." Sufyan said, "This saying means: a prophet who regards the Qur'an as
something that makes hi

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 543:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Not to wish to be the like except of two men. A man
whom Allah has given the knowledge of the Book and he recites it during
the hours of the night, and a man whom Allah has given wealth, and he
spends it in charity during the night and the hours of the day."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 544:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle I said, "Not to wish to be the like of except two men: A man
whom Allah has taught the Qur'an and he recites it during the hours of the
night and during the hours of the day, and his neighbor listens to him and
says, 'I wish I had been given what has been given to so-and-so, so that I
might do what he does; and a man whom Allah has given wealth and he
spends it on what is just and right, whereupon an other man May say, 'I wish
I had been given what so-and-so has been given, for then I would do what
he does."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 545:
Narrated 'Uthman:
The Prophet said, "The best among you (Muslims) are those who learn the
Qur'an and teach it."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 546:
Narrated Uthman bin Affan:
The Prophet said, "The most superior among you (Muslims) are those who
learn the Qur'an and teach it."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 547:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
A lady came to the Prophet and declared that she had decided to offer
herself to Allah and His Apostle. The Prophet said, "I am not in need of
women." A man said (to the Prophet) "Please marry her to me." The
Prophet said (to him), "Give her a garment." The man said, "I cannot afford
it." The Prophet said, "Give her anything, even if it were an iron ring." The
man apologized again. The Prophet then asked him, "What do you know by
heart of the Qur'an?" He replied, "I know such-and-such portion of the
Qur'an (by heart)." The Prophet said, "Then I marry her to you for that much
of the Qur'an which you know by heart."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 548:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
A lady came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have come to
you to offer myself to you." He raised his eyes and looked at her and then
lowered his head. When the lady saw that he did not make any decision, she
sat down. On that, a man from his companions got up and said. "O Allah's
Apostle! If you are not in need of this woman, then marry her to me." Allah's
Apostle said, "Do you have anything to offer her?" He replied. "No, by Allah,
O Allah's Apostle!" The Prophet said to him, "Go to your family and see if
you can find something.' The man went and returned, saying, "No, by Allah,
O Allah's Apostle! I have not found anything." The Prophet said, "Try to find
something, even if it is an iron ring.'' He went again and returned, saying,
"No, by Allah, O Allah's Apostle, not even an iron ring, but I have this waist
sheet of mine." The man had no upper garment, so he intended to give her,
half his waist sheet. So Allah's Apostle said, ''What would she do with your
waist sheet? If you wear it, she will have nothing of it over her body, and if
she wears it, you will have nothing over your body." So that man sat for a
long period and then got up, and Allah's Apostle saw him going away, so he
ordered somebody to call him. When he came, the Prophet asked him, "
How much of the Qur'an do you know?" He replied, "I know such Surat and
such Surat and such Surat," and went on counting it, The Prophet asked him,
"Can you recite it by heart?" he replied, "Yes." The Prophet said, "Go, I have
married this lady to you for the amount of the Qur'an you know by heart."
Volume 6, Book 61, Number 549:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "The example of the person who knows the Qur'an by
heart is like the owner of tied camels. If he keeps them tied, he will control
them, but if he releases them, they will run away."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 550:
Narrated Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "It is a bad thing that some of you say, 'I have forgotten
such-and-such verse of the Qur'an,' for indeed, he has been caused (by
Allah) to forget it. So you must keep on reciting the Qur'an because it
escapes from the hearts of men faster than camel do."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 551:
Narrated Abdullah:
I heard the Prophet saying... (as above, no. 550).

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 552:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "Keep on reciting the Qur'an, for, by Him in Whose Hand
my life is, Quran runs away (is forgotten) faster than camels that are
released from their tying ropes."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 553:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mughaffal:
I saw Allah's Apostle reciting Surat-al-Fath on his she-camel on the day of the
Conquest of Mecca.

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 554:
Narrated Said bid Jubair:
Those Suras which you people call the Mufassal, are the Muhkam. And Ibn
'Abbas said, "Allah's Apostle died when I was a boy of ten years, and I had
learnt the Muhkam (of the Qur'an).

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 555:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
Ibn 'Abbas said, "I have learnt all the Muhkam Suras during the life time of
Allah's Apostle." I said to him, 'What is meant by the Muhkam?" He replied,
"The Mufassal."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 556:
Narrated Aisha:
The Prophet heard a man reciting the Qur'an in the mosque and said, "May
Allah bestow His Mercy on him, as he has reminded me of such-and-such
Verses of such a Surah."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 557:
Narrated Hisham:
(The same Hadith, adding): which I missed (modifying the Verses).

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 558:
Narrated Aisha:
Allah's Apostle heard a man reciting the Qur'an at night, and said, "May
Allah bestow His Mercy on him, as he has reminded me of such-and-such
Verses of such-and-such Suras, which I was caused to forget."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 559:
Narrated Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "Why does anyone of the people say, 'I have forgotten
such-and-such Verses (of the Qur'an)?' He, in fact, is caused (by Allah) to
forget."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 560:
Narrated Abu Mas'ud Al-Ansari:
The Prophet said, "If one recites the last two Verses of Surat-al-Baqara at
night, it is sufficient for him (for that night)."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 561:
Narrated Umar bin Khattab:
I heard Hisham bin Hakim bin Hizam reciting Surat-al-Furqan during the
lifetime of Allah's Apostle, and I listened to his recitation and noticed that he
recited it in several ways which Allah's Apostle had not taught me. So I was
on the point of attacking him in the prayer, but I waited till he finished his
prayer, and then I seized him by the collar and said, "Who taught you this
Surah which I have heard you reciting?" He replied, "Allah's Apostle taught it
to me." I said, "You are telling a lie; By Allah! Allah's Apostle taught me (in a
different way) this very Surah which I have heard you reciting." So I took
him, leading him to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I heard this
person reciting Surat-al-Furqan in a way that you did not teach me, and you
have taught me Surat-al-Furqan." The Prophet said, "O Hisham, recite!" So
he recited in the same way as I heard him recite it before. On that Allah's
Apostle said, "It was revealed to be recited in this way." Then Allah's Apostle
said, "Recite, O 'Umar!" So I recited it as he had taught me. Allah's Apostle
then said, "It was revealed to be recited in this way." Allah" Apostle added,
"The Quran has been revealed to be recited in several different ways, so
recite of it that which is easier for you."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 562:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet heard a reciter reciting, the Qur'an in the mosque at night. The
Prophet said, "May Allah bestow His Mercy on him, as he has remind ed me
of such-and-such Verses of such and-such Suras, which I missed!"

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 563:
Narrated Abu Wail:
We went to 'Abdullah in the morning and a man said, "Yesterday I recited all
the Mufassal Suras." On that 'Abdullah said, "That is very quick, and we have
the (Prophet's) recitation, and I remember very well the recitation of those
Suras which the Prophet used to recite, and they were eighteen Suras from
the Mufassal, and two Suras from the Suras that start with Ha Mim.

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 564:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Regarding His (Allah's) Statement:-- 'Move not your tongue concerning (the
Qur'an) to make haste therewith.' (75.16) And whenever Gabriel descended
to Allah's Apostle with the Divine Inspiration, Allah's Apostle used to move
his tongue and lips, and that used to be hard for him, and one could easily
recognize that he was being inspired Divinely. So Allah revealed the Verse
which occurs in the Surah starting with "I do swear by the Day of
Resurrection.' (75.1) i.e. 'Move not your tongue concerning (the Qur'an) to
make haste then with. It is for Us to collect it (in your mind) (O Muhammad)
an give you the ability to recite it 'by heart.' (75.16-17) which means: It is for
us to collect it (in your mind) and give you the ability to recite it by heart.
And when We have recited it to you (O Muhammad) through Gabriel then
follow you its recital. (75.18) means: 'When We reveal it (the Qur'an) to you,
Listen to it.' for then: It is for Us to explain it and make it clear to you' (75.19)
i.e. It is up to Us to explain it through your tongue. So, when Gabriel came to
him, Allah's Apostle would listen to him attentively, and as soon as Gabriel
left, he would recite the Revelations, as Allah had promised him.

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 565:
Narrated Qatada:
I asked Anas bin Malik about the recitation of the Prophet. He said, "He used
to pray long (certain sounds) very much.

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 566:
Narrated Qatada:
Anas was asked, "How was the recitation (of the Quran) of the Prophet?' He
replied, "It was characterized by the prolongation of certain sounds." He
then recited: In the Name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
prolonging the pronunciation of 'In the Name of Allah, 'the most
Beneficent,' and 'the Most Merciful.

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 567:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mughaffal:
I saw the Prophet reciting (Qur'an) while he was riding on his she camel or
camel which was moving, carrying him. He was reciting Surat Fath or part of
Surat Fath very softly and in an Attractive vibrating tone.
Volume 6, Book 61, Number 568:
Narrated Abu Musa:
That the Prophet said to him' "O Abu Musa! You have been given one of the
musical wind-instruments of the family of David .'

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 569:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
That the Prophet said to him, "Recite the Qur'an to me." 'Abdullah said,
"Shall I recite (the Qur'an) to you while it has been revealed to you?" He
said, "I like to hear it from others."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 570:
Narrated Abdullah bin Mas'ud:
The Prophet said to me, "Recite (the Quran) to me." I said, "O Allah's
Apostle Shall I recite (the Qur'an) to you while it has been revealed to you?"
He said, "Yes." So I recited Surat-An-Nisa' (The Women), but when I recited
the Verse:
'How (will it be) then when We bring from each nation a witness and We
bring you (O Muhammad) as a witness against these people.' (4.41) He said,
"Enough for the present," I looked at him and behold! His eyes were
overflowing with tears

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 571:
Narrated Sufyan:
Ibn Shubruma said, "I wanted to see how much of the Qur'an can be enough
(to recite in prayer) and I could not find a Surah containing less than three
Verses, therefore I said to myself), "One ought not to recite less than three
(Quranic) Verses (in prayer)."
Narrated Abu Mas'ud: The Prophet said, "If somebody recites the last two
Verses of Surat al-Baqara at night, it will be sufficient for him.

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 572:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Amr bin Al-As:
My father got me married to a lady of a noble family, and often used to ask
my wife about me, and she used to reply, "What a wonderful man he is! He
never comes to my bed, nor has he approached me since he married me."
When this state continued for a long period, my father told the story to the
Prophet who said to my father, "Let me meet him." Then I met him and he
asked me, "How do you fast?" I replied, "I fast daily," He asked, "How long
does it take you to finish the recitation of the whole Quran?" I replied, "I
finish it every night." On that he said, "Fast for three days every month and
recite the Qur'an (and finish it) in one month." I said, "But I have power to
do more than that." He said, "Then fast for three days per week." I said, "i
have the power to do more than that." He said, "Therefore, fast the most
superior type of fasting, (that is, the fasting of (prophet) David who used to
fast every alternate day; and finish the recitation of the whole Qur'an In
seven days." I wish I had accepted the permission of Allah's Apostle as I
have become a weak old man. It is said that 'Abdullah used to recite oneseventh of the Qur'an during the day-time to some of his family members,
for he used to check his memorization of what he would recite at night
during the daytime so that it would be easier for him to read at night. And
whenever he wanted to gain some strength, he used to give up fasting for
some days and count those days to fast for a similar period, for he disliked
to leave those things which he used to do during the lifetime of the Prophet.

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 573:
Narrated Abdullah bin Amr:
The Prophet asked me, "How long does it take you to finish the recitation of
the whole Qur'an?"

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 574:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
Allah's Apostle said to me, "Recite the whole Qur'an in one month's time." I
said, "But I have power (to do more than that)." Allah's Apostle said, "Then
finish the recitation of the Qur'an in seven days, and do not finish it in less
than this period."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 575:
Narrated 'Abdullah (bin Mas'ud):
Allah's Apostle said (to me), "Recite the Qur'an to me." I said, "Shall I recite
(it) to you while it has been revealed to you?" He said, "I like to hear it from
another person." So I recited Surat An-Nisa (The Women) till I reached the
Verse: 'How (will it be) then when We bring from each nation a witness, and
We bring you (O Muhammad) as a witness against these people.' (4.41) Then
he said to me, "Stop!" Thereupon I saw his eyes overflowing with tears.

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 576:
Narrated Abdullah bin Masud:
The Prophet said to me, "Recite Quran to me." I said to him. "Shall I recite
(it) to you while it has been revealed to you?" He said, "I like to hear it from
another person."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 577:
Narrated 'Ali:
I heard the Prophet saying, "In the last days (of the world) there will appear
young people with foolish thoughts and ideas. They will give good talks, but
they will go out of Islam as an arrow goes out of its game, their faith will not
exceed their throats. So, wherever you find them, kill them, for there will be
a reward for their killers on the Day of Resurrection."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 578:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "There will appear some people among you
whose prayer will make you look down upon yours, and whose fasting will
make you look down upon yours, but they will recite the Qur'an which will
not exceed their throats (they will not act on it) and they will go out of Islam
as an arrow goes out through the game whereupon the archer would
examine the arrowhead but see nothing, and look at the unfeathered arrow
but see nothing, and look at the arrow feathers but see nothing, and finally
he suspects to find something in the lower part of the arrow."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 579:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "The example of a believer who recites the Qur'an and
acts on it, like a citron which tastes nice and smells nice. And the example of
a believer who does not recite the Qur'an but acts on it, is like a date which
tastes good but has no smell. And the example of a hypocrite who recites
the Qur'an is like a Raihana (sweet basil) which smells good but tastes bitter
And the example of a hypocrite who does not recite the Quran is like a
colocynth which tastes bitter and has a bad smell."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 580:
Narrated Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "Recite (and study) the Qur'an as long as you agree about
its interpretation, but if you have any difference of opinion (as regards to its
interpretation and meaning) then you should stop reciting it (for the time
being)."

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 581:
Narrated Jundub:
The Prophet said, "Recite (and study) the Quran as long as you agree about
its interpretation, but when you have any difference of opinion (as regards
its interpretation and meaning) then you should stop reciting it (for the time
being)'

Volume 6, Book 61, Number 582:
Narrated Abdullah:
That he heard a man reciting a Quranic Verse which he had heard the
Prophet reciting in a different way. So he took that man to the Prophet (and
told him the story). The Prophet said, "Both of you are reciting in a correct
way, so carry on reciting." The Prophet further added, "The nations which
were before you were destroyed (by Allah) because they differed."
VOLUME 7
BOOK 62. WEDLOCK, MARRIAGE (NIKAAH) (1-177)
Volume 7, Book 62, Number 1:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
A group of three men came to the houses of the wives of the Prophet asking
how the Prophet worshipped (Allah), and when they were informed about
that, they considered their worship insufficient and said, "Where are we
from the Prophet as his past and future sins have been forgiven." Then one
of them said, "I will offer the prayer throughout the night forever." The
other said, "I will fast throughout the year and will not break my fast." The
third said, "I will keep away from the women and will not marry forever."
Allah's Apostle came to them and said, "Are you the same people who said
so-and-so? By Allah, I am more submissive to Allah and more afraid of Him
than you; yet I fast and break my fast, I do sleep and I also marry women. So
he who does not follow my tradition in religion, is not from me (not one of
my followers)."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 2:
Narrated 'Ursa:
that he asked 'Aisha about the Statement of Allah: 'If you fear that you shall
not be able to deal justly with the orphan girls, then marry (other) women of
your choice, two or three or four; but if you fear that you shall not be able to
deal justly (with them), then only one, or (the captives) that your right
hands possess. That will be nearer to prevent you from doing injustice.' (4.3)
'Aisha said, "O my nephew! (This Verse has been revealed in connection
with) an orphan girl under the guardianship of her guardian who is attracted
by her wealth and beauty and intends to marry her with a Mahr less than
what other women of her standard deserve. So they (such guardians) have
been forbidden to marry them unless they do justice to them and give them
their full Mahr, and they are ordered to marry other women instead of
them."
Volume 7, Book 62, Number 3:
Narrated 'Alqama:
While I was with Abdullah, 'Uthman met him at Mina and said, "O Abu
'Abdur-Rahman ! I have something to say to you." So both of them went
aside and 'Uthman said, "O Abu 'Abdur-Rah. man! Shall we marry you to a
virgin who will make you remember your past days?" When 'Abdullah felt
that he was not in need of that, he beckoned me (to join him) saying, "O
'Alqama!" Then I heard him saying (in reply to 'Uthman), "As you have said
that, (I tell you that) the Prophet once said to us, 'O young people! Whoever
among you is able to marry, should marry, and whoever is not able to marry,
is recommended to fast, as fasting diminishes his sexual power.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 4:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
We were with the Prophet while we were young and had no wealth
whatever. So Allah's Apostle said, "O young people! Whoever among you
can marry, should marry, because it helps him lower his gaze and guard his
modesty (i.e. his private parts from committing illegal sexual intercourse
etc.), and whoever is not able to marry, should fast, as fasting diminishes his
sexual power."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 5:
Narrated 'Ata:
We presented ourselves along with Ibn 'Abbas at the funeral procession of
Maimuna at a place called Sarif. Ibn 'Abbas said, "This is the wife of the
Prophet so when you lift her bier, do not Jerk it or shake it much, but walk
smoothly because the Prophet had nine wives and he used to observe the
night turns with eight of them, and for one of them there was no night
turn."
Volume 7, Book 62, Number 6:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet I used to go round (have sexual relations with) all his wives in
one night, and he had nine wives.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 7:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
Ibn 'Abbas asked me, "Are you married?" I replied, "No." He said, "Marry, for
the best person of this (Muslim) nation (i.e., Muhammad) of all other
Muslims, had the largest number of wives."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 8:
Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:
The Prophet said, "The rewards (of deeds) are according to the intention,
and everybody will get the reward for what he has intended. So whoever
emigrated for Allah's and His Apostle's sake, his emigration was for Allah
and His Apostle; and whoever emigrated for worldly benefits, or to marry a
woman, then his emigration was for the thing for what he emigrated for."
(1)

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 9:
Narrated Ibn Masud:
We used to fight in the holy battles in the company of the Prophet and we
had no wives with us. So we said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall we get
castrated?" The Prophet forbade us to do so.
Volume 7, Book 62, Number 10:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf came (from Mecca to Medina) and the Prophet
made a bond of brotherhood between him and Sad bin Ar-Rabi' Al-Ansari.
Al-Ansari had two wives, so he suggested that 'Abdur-Rahman take half, his
wives and property. 'Abdur-Rahman replied, "May Allah bless you with your
wives and property. Kindly show me the market." So 'Abdur-Rahman went
to the market and gained (in bargains) some dried yoghurt and some butter.
After a few days the Prophet saw Abdur-Rahman with some yellow stains on
his clothes and asked him, "What is that, O 'Abdur-Rahman?" He replied, "I
had married an Ansari woman." The Prophet asked, "How much Mahr did
you give her?" He replied, "The weight of one (date) stone of gold." The
Prophet said, "Offer a banquet, even with one sheep."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 11:
Narrated Sad bin Abi Waqqas:
Allah's Apostle forbade 'Uthman bin Maz'un to abstain from marrying (and
other pleasures) and if he had allowed him, we would have gotten ourselves
castrated.(1)

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 12:
Narrated Sad bin Abi Waqqas:
The Prophet prevented 'Uthman bin Mazun from that (not marrying), and
had he allowed him, we would have got ourselves castrated.(1)

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 13o:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
We used to participate in the holy battles led by Allah's Apostle and we had
nothing (no wives) with us. So we said, "Shall we get ourselves castrated?"
He forbade us that and then allowed us to marry women with a temporary
contract (2) and recited to us: -- 'O you who believe ! Make not unlawful the
good things which Allah has made lawful for you, but commit no
transgression.' (5.87)

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 13h:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I am a young man and I am afraid that I may
commit illegal sexual intercourse and I cannot afford to marry." He kept
silent, and then repeated my question once again, but he kept silent. I said
the same (for the third time) and he remained silent. Then repeated my
question (for the fourth time), and only then the Prophet said, "O Abu
Huraira! The pen has dried after writing what you are going to confront. So
(it does not matter whether you) get yourself castrated or not."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 14:
Narrated 'Aisha :
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Suppose you landed in a valley where there is a
tree of which something has been eaten and then you found trees of which
nothing has been eaten, of which tree would you let your camel graze?" He
said, "(I will let my camel graze) of the one of which nothing has been eaten
before." (The sub-narrator added: 'Aisha meant that Allah's Apostle had not
married a virgin besides herself .)

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 15:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said (to me), "You have been shown to me twice in (my)
dreams. A man was carrying you in a silken cloth and said to me, 'This is your
wife.' I uncovered it; and behold, it was you. I said to myself, 'If this dream is
from Allah, He will cause it to come true.' "

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 16:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
While we were returning from a Ghazwa (Holy Battle) with the Prophet, I
started driving my camel fast, as it was a lazy camel A rider came behind me
and pricked my camel with a spear he had with him, and then my camel
started running as fast as the best camel you may see. Behold! The rider was
the Prophet himself. He said, 'What makes you in such a hurry?" I replied, I
am newly married " He said, "Did you marry a virgin or a matron? I replied,
"A matron." He said, "Why didn't you marry a young girl so that you may
play with her and she with you?" When we were about to enter (Medina),
the Prophet said, "Wait so that you may enter (Medina) at night so that the
lady of unkempt hair may comb her hair and the one whose husband has
been absent may shave her pubic region.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 17:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
When I got married, Allah's Apostle said to me, "What type of lady have you
married?" I replied, "I have married a matron' He said, "Why, don't you have
a liking for the virgins and for fondling them?" Jabir also said: Allah's Apostle
said, "Why didn't you marry a young girl so that you might play with her and
she with you?'

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 18:
Narrated 'Ursa:
The Prophet asked Abu Bakr for 'Aisha's hand in marriage. Abu Bakr said
"But I am your brother." The Prophet said, "You are my brother in Allah's
religion and His Book, but she (Aisha) is lawful for me to marry."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 19:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The best women are the riders of the camels and the
righteous among the women of Quraish. They are the kindest women to
their children in their childhood and the more careful women of the
property of their husbands."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 20:
Narrated Abu Burda's father:
Allah's Apostle said, any man who has a slave girl whom he educates
properly, teaches good manners, manumits and marries her, will get a
double reward And if any man of the people of the Scriptures believes in his
own prophet and then believes in me too, he will (also) get a double reward
And any slave who fulfills his duty to his master and to his Lord, will (also)
get a double reward."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 21:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said: Abraham did not tell lies except three. (One of them was)
when Abraham passed by a tyrant and (his wife) Sara was accompanying
him (Abu Huraira then mentioned the whole narration and said:) (The
tyrant) gave her Hajar. Sara said, "Allah saved me from the hands of the
Kafir (i.e. infidel) and gave me Hajar to serve me." (Abu Huraira added:) That
(Hajar) is your mother, O Banu Ma'-As-Sama' (i.e., the Arabs).
Volume 7, Book 62, Number 22:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet stayed for three days between Khaibar and Medina, and there
he consummated his marriage to Safiyya bint Huyai. I invited the Muslims to
the wedding banquet in which neither meat nor bread was offered. He
ordered for leather dining-sheets to be spread, and dates, dried yoghurt and
butter were laid on it, and that was the Prophet's wedding banquet. The
Muslims wondered, "Is she (Saffiyya) considered as his wife or his slave
girl?" Then they said, "If he orders her to veil herself, she will be one of the
mothers of the Believers; but if he does not order her to veil herself, she will
be a slave girl. So when the Prophet proceeded from there, he spared her a
space behind him (on his she-camel) and put a screening veil between her
and the people.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 23:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle manumitted Safiyya and regarded her manumission as her
Mahr.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 24:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi:
A woman came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have come
to give you myself in marriage (without Mahr)." Allah's Apostle looked at
her. He looked at her carefully and fixed his glance on her and then lowered
his head. When the lady saw that he did not say anything, she sat down. A
man from his companions got up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! If you are not
in need of her, then marry her to me." The Prophet said, "Have you got
anything to offer?" The man said, "No, by Allah, O Allah's Apostle!" The
Prophet said (to him), "Go to your family and see if you have something."
The man went and returned, saying, "No, by Allah, I have not found
anything." Allah's Apostle said, "(Go again) and look for something, even if it
is an iron ring." He went again and returned, saying, "No, by Allah, O Allah's
Apostle! I could not find even an iron ring, but this is my Izar (waist sheet)."
He had no rida. He added, "I give half of it to her." Allah's Apostle said,
"What will she do with your Izar? If you wear it, she will be naked, and if she
wears it, you will be naked." So that man sat down for a long while and then
got up (to depart). When Allah's Apostle saw him going, he ordered that he
be called back. When he came, the Prophet said, "How much of the Quran
do you know?" He said, "I know such Sura and such Sura," counting them.
The Prophet said, "Do you know them by heart?" He replied, "Yes." The
Prophet said, "Go, I marry her to you for that much of the Quran which you
have."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 25:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Abu Hudhaifa bin 'Utba bin Rabi'a bin Abdi Shams who had witnessed the
battle of Badr along with the Prophet adopted Salim as his son, to whom he
married his niece, Hind bint Al-Walid bin 'Utba bin Rabi'a; and Salim was the
freed slave of an Ansar woman, just as the Prophet had adopted Zaid as his
son. It was the custom in the Pre-lslamic Period that if somebody adopted a
boy, the people would call him the son of the adoptive father and he would
be the latter's heir. But when Allah revealed the Divine Verses: 'Call them by
(the names of) their fathers . . . your freed-slaves,' (33.5) the adopted
persons were called by their fathers' names. The one whose father was not
known, would be regarded as a Maula and your brother in religion. Later on
Sahla bint Suhail bin 'Amr Al-Quraishi Al-'Amiri--and she was the wife of AbuHudhaifa bin 'Utba--came to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! We
used to consider Salim as our (adopted) son, and now Allah has revealed
what you know (regarding adopted sons)." The sub-narrator then
mentioned the rest of the narration.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 26:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle entered upon Dubaa bint Az-Zubair and said to her, "Do you
have a desire to perform the Hajj?" She replied, "By Allah, I feel sick." He said
to her, "Intend to perform Hajj and stipulate something by saying, 'O Allah, I
will finish my Ihram at any place where You stop me (i.e. I am unable to go
further)." She was the wife of Al-Miqdad bin Al-Aswad.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 27:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "A woman is married for four things, i.e., her wealth, her
family status, her beauty and her religion. So you should marry the religious
woman (otherwise) you will be a losers.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 28:
Narrated Sahl:
A man passed by Allah's Apostle and Allah s Apostle asked (his companions)
"What do you say about this (man)?" They replied "If he asks for a lady's
hand, he ought to be given her in marriage; and if he intercedes (for
someone) his intercessor should be accepted; and if he speaks, he should be
listened to." Allah's Apostle kept silent, and then a man from among the
poor Muslims passed by, an Allah's Apostle asked (them) "What do you say
about this man?" They replied, "If he asks for a lady's hand in marriage he
does not deserve to be married, and he intercedes (for someone), his
intercession should not be accepted; And if he speaks, he should not be
listened to.' Allah's Apostle said, "This poor man is better than so many of
the first as filling the earth.'

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 29:
Narrated 'Ursa:
that he asked 'Aisha regarding the Verse: 'If you fear that you shall not be
able to deal justly with the orphans (4.3) She said, "O my nephew! This Verse
refers to the orphan girl who is under the guardianship of her guardian who
likes her beauty and wealth and wishes to (marry her and) curtails her Mahr.
Such guardians have been forbidden to marry them unless they do justice by
giving them their full Mahr, and they have been ordered to marry other than
them. The people asked for the verdict of Allah's Apostle after that, so Allah
revealed: 'They ask your instruction concerning the women . . . whom you
desire to marry.' (4.127) So Allah revealed to them that if the orphan girl had
beauty and wealth, they desired to marry her and for her family status. They
can only marry them if they give them their full Mahr. And if they had no
desire to marry them because of their lack of wealth and beauty, they would
leave them and marry other women. So, as they used to leave them, when
they had no interest, in them, they were forbidden to marry them when they
had such interest, unless they treated them justly and gave them their full
Mahr Apostle said, 'If at all there is evil omen, it is in the horse, the woman
and the house." a lady is to be warded off. And the Statement of Allah:
'Truly, among your wives and your children, there are enemies for you (i.e
may stop you from the obedience of Allah)' (64.14)

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 30:
Narrated Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Evil omen is in the women, the house and the horse.'

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 31:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Evil omen was mentioned before the Prophet: The Prophet said, "If there is
evil omen in anything, it is in the house, the woman and the horse."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 32:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
Allah's Apostle said, "If at all there is bad omen, it is in the horse, the
woman, and the house."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 33:
Narrated Usama bin Zaid:
The Prophet said, "After me I have not left any affliction more harmful to
men than women."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 34:
Narrated 'Aisha :
Three principles were established because of Barira: (i) When Banra was
manumitted she was given the option (to remain with her slave husband or
not). (ii) Allah's Apostle said "The Wala of the slave) is for the one who
manumits (the slave). (iii) When Allah's Apostle entered (the house), he saw
a cooking pot on the fire but he was given bread and meat soup from the
soup of the home. The Prophet said, "Didn't I see the cooking pot (on the
fire)?" It was said, "That is the meat given in charity to Barira, and you do not
eat the (things given in) charity." The Prophet said, "It is an object of charity
for Barira, and it is a present for us."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 35:
Narrated Aisha"
(regarding) the Verse: 'And if you fear that you shall not be able to deal
justly with the orphans...' (4.3) It is about the orphan girl who is in the
custody of a man who is her guardian, and he intends to marry her because
of her wealth, but he treats her badly and does not manage her property
fairly and honestly. Such a man should marry women of his liking other than
her, two or three or four. 'Prohibited to you (for marriage) are: ...your
foster-mothers (who suckled you).' (4.23) Marriage is prohibited between
persons having a foster suckling relationship corresponding to a blood
relationship which renders marriage unlawful.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 36:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) that while Allah's Apostle was with her, she heard
a voice of a man asking permission to enter the house of Hafsa. 'Aisha
added: I said, "O Allah's Apostle! This man is asking permission to enter your
house." The Prophet said, "I think he is so-and-so," naming the foster-uncle
of Hafsa. 'Aisha said, "If so-and-so," naming her foster uncle, "were living,
could he enter upon me?" The Prophet said, "Yes, for foster suckling
relations make all those things unlawful which are unlawful through
corresponding birth (blood) relations."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 37:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
It was said to the Prophet, "Won't you marry the daughter of Hamza?" He
said, "She is my foster niece (brother's daughter). "

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 38:
Narrated Um Habiba:
(daughter of Abu Sufyan) I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Marry my sister. the
daughter of Abu Sufyan." The Prophet said, "Do you like that?" I replied,
"Yes, for even now I am not your only wife and I like that my sister should
share the good with me." The Prophet said, "But that is not lawful for me." I
said, We have heard that you want to marry the daughter of Abu Salama."
He said, "(You mean) the daughter of Um Salama?" I said, "Yes." He said,
"Even if she were not my step-daughter, she would be unlawful for me to
marry as she is my foster niece. I and Abu Salama were suckled by Thuwaiba.
So you should not present to me your daughters or your sisters (in
marriage)." Narrated 'Ursa; Thuwaiba was the freed slave girl of Abu Lahb
whom he had manumitted, and then she suckled the Prophet. When Abu
Lahb died, one of his relatives saw him in a dream in a very bad state and
asked him, "What have you encountered?" Abu Lahb said, "I have not found
any rest since I left you, except that I have been given water to drink in this
(the space between his thumb and other fingers) and that is because of my
manumitting Thuwaiba."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 39:
Narrated 'Aisha:
that the Prophet entered upon her while a man was sitting with her. Signs of
anger seemed to appear on his face as if he disliked that. She said, "Here is
my (foster) brother." He said, "Be sure as to who is your foster brother, for
foster suckling relationship is established only when milk is the only food of
the child."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 40:
Narrated Aisha:
that Aflah the brother of Abu Al-Qu'ais, her foster uncle, came, asking
permission to enter upon her after the Verse of Al-Hijab (the use of veils by
women) was revealed. 'Aisha added: I did not allow him to enter, but when
Allah's Apostle came, I told him what I had done, and he ordered me to give
him permission.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 41:
Narrated 'Uqba bin Al-Harith:
I married a woman and then a black lady came to us and said, "I have
suckled you both (you and your wife)." So I came to the Prophet and said, "I
married so-and-so and then a black lady came to us and said to me, 'I have
suckled both of you.' But I think she is a liar." The Prophet turned his face
away from me and I moved to face his face, and said, "She is a liar." The
Prophet said, "How (can you keep her as your wife) when that lady has said
that she has suckled both of you? So abandon (i.e., divorce) her (your wife)."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 42:
Narrated Um Habiba:
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Do you like to have (my sister) the daughter of Abu
Sufyan?" The Prophet said, "What shall I do (with her)?" I said, "Marry her."
He said, "Do you like that?" I said, "(Yes), for even now I am not your only
wife, so I like that my sister should share you with me." He said, "She is not
lawful for me (to marry)." I said, "We have heard that you want to marry."
He said, "The daughter of Um Salama?" I said, "Yes." He said, "Even if she
were not my stepdaughter, she should be unlawful for me to marry, for
Thuwaiba suckled me and her father (Abu Salama). So you should neither
present your daughters, nor your sisters, to me."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 43:
Narrated Um Habiba:
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Marry my sister, the daughter of Abu Sufyan." He
said, "Do you like that?" I said, "Yes, for even now I am not your only wife;
and the most beloved person to share the good with me is my sister." The
Prophet said, "But that is not lawful for me (i.e., to be married to two sisters
at a time.)" I said, "O Allah's Apostle! By Allah, we have heard that you want
to marry Durra, the daughter of Abu Salama." He said, "You mean the
daughter of Um Salama?" I said, "Yes." He said, "By Allah ! Even if she were
not my stepdaughter, she would not be lawful for me to marry, for she is my
foster niece, for Thuwaiba has suckled me and Abu Salama; so you should
neither present your daughters, nor your sisters to me."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 44:
Narrated Jabir:
Allah's Apostle forbade that a woman should be married to man along with
her paternal or maternal aunt.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 45:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "A woman and her paternal aunt should not be married
to the same man; and similarly, a woman and her maternal aunt should not
be married to the same man."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 46:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet forbade that a woman should be married to a man along with
her paternal aunt or with her maternal aunt (at the same time). Az-Zuhri
(the sub-narrator) said: There is a similar order for the paternal aunt of the
father of one's wife, for 'Ursa told me that 'Aisha said, "What is unlawful
because of blood relations, is also unlawful because of the corresponding
foster suckling relations."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 47:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar :
Allah's Apostle forbade Ash-Shighar, which means that somebody marries
his daughter to somebody else, and the latter marries his daughter to the
former without paying Mahr.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 48:
Narrated Hisham's father:
Khaula bint Hakim was one of those ladies who presented themselves to the
Prophet for marriage. 'Aisha said, "Doesn't a lady feel ashamed for
presenting herself to a man?" But when the Verse: "(O Muhammad) You
may postpone (the turn of) any of them (your wives) that you please,'
(33.51) was revealed, " 'Aisha said, 'O Allah's Apostle! I do not see, but, that
your Lord hurries in pleasing you.' "

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 49:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet got married while he was in the state of Ihram.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 50:
Narrated 'Ali:
I said to Ibn 'Abbas, "During the battle of Khaibar the Prophet forbade
(Nikah) Al-Mut'a and the eating of donkey's meat."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 51:
Narrated Abu Jamra:
I heard Ibn Abbas (giving a verdict) when he was asked about the Mut'a
with the women, and he permitted it (Nikah-al-Mut'a). On that a freed slave
of his said to him, "That is only when it is very badly needed and women are
scarce." On that, Ibn 'Abbas said, "Yes."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 52:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah and Salama bin Al-Akwa':
While we were in an army, Allah's Apostle came to us and said, "You have
been allowed to do the Mut'a (marriage), so do it." Salama bin Al-Akwa'
said: Allah's Apostle's said, "If a man and a woman agree (to marry
temporarily), their marriage should last for three nights, and if they like to
continue, they can do so; and if they want to separate, they can do so." I do
not know whether that was only for us or for all the people in general. Abu
Abdullah (Al-Bukhari) said: 'Ali made it clear that the Prophet said, "The
Mut'a marriage has been cancelled (made unlawful)."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 53:
Narrated Thabit Al-Banani:
I was with Anas while his daughter was present with him. Anas said, "A
woman came to Allah's Apostle and presented herself to him, saying, 'O
Allah's Apostle, have you any need for me (i.e. would you like to marry me)?'
"Thereupon Anas's daughter said, "What a shameless lady she was ! Shame!
Shame!" Anas said, "She was better than you; she had a liking for the
Prophet so she presented herself for marriage to him."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 54:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
A woman presented herself to the Prophet (for marriage). A man said to
him, "O Allah's Apostle! (If you are not in need of her) marry her to me." The
Prophet said, "What have you got?" The man said, "I have nothing." The
Prophet said (to him), "Go and search for something) even if it were an iron
ring." The man went and returned saying, "No, I have not found anything,
not even an iron ring; but this is my (Izar) waist sheet, and half of it is for
her." He had no Rida' (upper garment). The Prophet said, "What will she do
with your waist sheet? If you wear it, she will have nothing over her; and if
she wears it, you will have nothing over you." So the man sat down and
when he had sat a long time, he got up (to leave). When the Prophet saw
him (leaving), he called him back, or the man was called (for him), and he
said to the man, "How much of the Quran do you know (by heart)?" The
man replied I know such Sura and such Sura (by heart)," naming the Suras
The Prophet said, "I have married her to you for what you know of the
Quran "

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 55:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar :
'Umar bin Al-Khattab said, "When Hafsa bint 'Umar became a widow after
the death of (her husband) Khunais bin Hudhafa As-Sahmi who had been
one of the companions of the Prophet, and he died at Medina. I went to
'Uthman bin 'Affan and presented Hafsa (for marriage) to him. He said, "I
will think it over.' I waited for a few days, then he met me and said, 'It seems
that it is not possible for me to marry at present.' " 'Umar further said, "I
met Abu Bakr As-Siddique and said to him, 'If you wish, I will marry my
daughter Hafsa to you." Abu Bakr kept quiet and did not say anything to me
in reply. I became more angry with him than with 'Uthman. I waited for a
few days and then Allah's Apostle asked for her hand, and I gave her in
marriage to him. Afterwards I met Abu Bakr who said, 'Perhaps you became
angry with me when you presented Hafsa to me and I did not give you a
reply?' I said, 'Yes.' Abu Bakr said, 'Nothing stopped me to respond to your
offer except that I knew that Allah's Apostle had mentioned her, and I never
wanted to let out the secret of Allah's Apostle. And if Allah's Apostle had
refused her, I would have accepted her.' "

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 56:
Narrated Zainab bint Salama:
Um Habiba said to Allah's Apostle "We have heard that you want to marry
Durra bint Abu-Salama." Allah's Apostle said, "Can she be married along with
Um Salama (her mother)? Even if I have not married Um Salama, she would
not be lawful for me to marry, for her father is my foster brother." 'And
there is no blame on you if you make hint of betrothal or conceal it in your
hearts. Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Forbearing.' (2.235) Ibn 'Abbas said,
"Hint your intention of marrying' is made by saying (to the widow) for
example: "I want to marry, and I wish that Allah will make a righteous lady
available for me.' " Al-Qasim said: One may say to the widow: 'I hold all
respect for you, and I am interested in you; Allah will bring you much good,
or something similar 'Ata said: One should hint his intention, and should not
declare it openly. One may say: 'I have some need. Have good tidings. Praise
be to Allah; you are fit to remarry.' She (the widow) may say in reply: I am
listening to what you say,' but she should not make a promise. Her guardian
should not make a promise (to somebody to get her married to him)
without her knowledge. But if, while still in the Iddat period, she makes a
promise to marry somebody, and he ultimately marries her, they are not to
be separated by divorce (i.e., the marriage is valid).

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 57:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said (to me), "You were shown to me in a dream. An angel
brought you to me, wrapped in a piece of silken cloth, and said to me, 'This
is your wife.' I removed the piece of cloth from your face, and there you
were. I said to myself. 'If it is from Allah, then it will surely be.' "

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 58:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
A woman came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have come
to you to present myself to you (for marriage)." Allah's Apostle glanced at
her. He looked at her carefully and fixed his glance on her and then lowered
his head. When the lady saw that he did not say anything, she sat down. A
man from his companions got up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! If you are not
in need of her, then marry her to me." The Prophet said, "Have you got
anything to offer." The man said, 'No, by Allah, O Allah's Apostle!" The
Prophet said (to him), "Go to your family and try to find something." So the
man went and returned, saying, "No, by Allah, O Allah's Apostle! I have not
found anything." The Prophet said, "Go again and look for something, even
if it were an iron ring." He went and returned, saying, "No, by Allah, O Allah's
Apostle! I could not find even an iron ring, but this is my Izar (waist sheet).'
He had no Rida (upper garment). He added, "I give half of it to her." Allah's
Apostle said "What will she do with your Izar? If you wear it, she will have
nothing over herself thereof (will be naked); and if she wears it, then you
will have nothing over yourself thereof ' So the man sat for a long period
and then got up (to leave). When Allah's Apostle saw him leaving, he
ordered that he e called back. When he came, the Prophet asked (him),
"How much of the Qur'an do you know (by heart)?" The man replied, I know
such Sura and such Sura and such Sura," naming the suras. The Prophet said,
"Can you recite it by heart?" He said, 'Yes." The Prophet said, "Go I let you
marry her for what you know of the Quran (as her Mahr).

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 59:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(as regards the Verse): 'And about what is recited unto you in the Book,
concerning orphan girls to whom you give not the prescribed portions and
yet, whom you desire to marry.' (4.127) This Verse is about the female
orphan who is under the guardianship of a man with whom she shares her
property and he has more right over her (than anybody else) but does not
like to marry her, so he prevents her, from marrying somebody else, lest he
should share the property with him.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 60:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
When Hafsa, 'Umar's daughter became a widow because of the death of her
(husband) Ibn Hudhafa As-Sahmi who was one of the companion of the
Prophet and the one of the Badr warriors and died at Medina, 'Umar said, "I
met 'Uthman bin 'Affan and gave him an offer, saying, 'If you wish, I will
marry Hafsa to you.' He said. 'I will think it over' I waited for a few days, then
he met me and said, 'I have made up my mind not to marry at present'
"Umar added, "Then I met Abu Bakr and said to him, 'If you wish, I will marry
Hafsa to you.' "

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 61:
Narrated Al-Hasan:
concerning the Verse: 'Do not prevent them' (2.232) Ma'qil bin Yasar told me
that it was revealed in his connection. He said, "I married my sister to a man
and he divorced her, and when her days of 'Idda (three menstrual periods)
were over, the man came again and asked for her hand, but I said to him, 'I
married her to you and made her your bed (your wife) and favored you with
her, but you divorced her. Now you come to ask for her hand again? No, by
Allah, she will never go back to you (again)!' That man was not a bad man
and his wife wanted to go back to him. So Allah revealed this Verse: 'Do not
prevent them.' (2.232) So I said, 'Now I will do it (let her go back to him), O
Allah's Apostle."So he married her to him again.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 62:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(regarding His Statement): 'They ask your instruction concerning the
women. Say: Allah instructs you about them ...' (4.127) It is about the female
orphan who is under the guardianship of a man with whom she shares her
property and he does not want to marry her and dislikes that someone else
should marry her, lest he should share the property with him, so he prevents
her from marrying. So Allah forbade such a guardian to do so (i.e. to prevent
her from marrying).

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 63:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
While we were sitting in the company of the Prophet a woman came to him
and presented herself (for marriage) to him. The Prophet looked at her,
lowering his eyes and raising them, but did not give a reply. One of his
companions said, "Marry her to me O Allah's Apostle!" The Prophet asked
(him), "Have you got anything?" He said, "I have got nothing." The Prophet
said, "Not even an iron ring?" He Sad, "Not even an iron ring, but I will tear
my garment into two halves and give her one half and keep the other half."
The Prophet; said, "No. Do you know some of the Quran (by heart)?" He
said, "Yes." The Prophet said, "Go, I have agreed to marry her to you with
what you know of the Qur'an (as her Mahr)." 'And for those who have no
courses (i.e. they are still immature). (65.4) And the 'Iddat for the girl before
puberty is three months (in the above Verse).

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 64:
Narrated 'Aisha:
that the Prophet married her when she was six years old and he
consummated his marriage when she was nine years old, and then she
remained with him for nine years (i.e., till his death).

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 65:
Narrated 'Aisha:
that the Prophet married her when she was six years old and he
consummated his marriage when she was nine years old. Hisham said: I have
been informed that 'Aisha remained with the Prophet for nine years (i.e. till
his death)." what you know of the Quran (by heart)'

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 66:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
A woman came to Allah's Apostle and said, "I present myself (to you) (for
marriage). She stayed for a long while, then a man said, "If you are not in
need of her then marry her to me." The Prophet said, "Have you got
anything m order to pay her Mahr?" He said, "I have nothing with me except
my Izar (waist sheet)." The Prophet said, "If you give her your Izar, you will
have no Izar to wear, (so go) and search for something. He said, "I could not
find anything." The Prophet said, "Try (to find something), even if it were an
iron ring But he was not able to find (even that) The Prophet said (to him).
"Do you memorize something of the Qur'an?" "Yes. ' he said, "such Sura and
such Sura," naming those Suras The Prophet said, "We have married her to
you for what you know of the Quran (by heart)."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 67:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "A matron should not be given in marriage except after
consulting her; and a virgin should not be given in marriage except after her
permission." The people asked, "O Allah's Apostle! How can we know her
permission?" He said, "Her silence (indicates her permission)."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 68:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! A virgin feels shy." He said, "Her consent is
(expressed by) her silence."
Volume 7, Book 62, Number 69:
Narrated Khansa bint Khidam Al-Ansariya:
that her father gave her in marriage when she was a matron and she disliked
that marriage. So she went to Allah's Apostle and he declared that marriage
invalid.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 70:
Narrated Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid and Majammi bin Yazid.
the same ,Hadith above: A man called Khidam married a daughter of his (to
somebody) against her consent. 'If you fear that you shall not be able to
deal justly with the orphan girls then marry (other) women of your choice.'
(4.3) And if somebody says to the guardian (of a woman), "Marry me to soand-so," and the guardian remained silent or said to him, "What have you
got?" And the other said, "I have so much and so much (Mahr)," or kept
quiet, and then the guardian said, "I have married her to you," then the
marriage is valid (legal). This narration was told by Sahl on the authority of
the Prophet

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 71:
Narrated 'Ursa bin Az-Zubair:
that he asked 'Aisha, saying to her, "O Mother! (In what connection was this
Verse revealed):
'If you fear that you shall not be able to deal justly with orphan girls (to the
end of the verse) that your right hands possess?" (4.3) Aisha said, "O my
nephew! It was about the female orphan under the protection of her
guardian who was interested in her beauty and wealth and wanted to marry
her with a little or reduced Mahr. So such guardians were forbidden to
marry female orphans unless they deal with them justly and give their full
Mahr; and they were ordered to marry women other than them."'Aisha
added, "(Later) the people asked Allah's Apostle, for instructions, and then
Allah revealed: 'They ask your instruction concerning the women . . . And yet
whom you desire to marry.' (4.127) So Allah revealed to them in this Verse
that-if a female orphan had wealth and beauty, they desired to marry her
and were interested in her noble descent and the reduction of her Mahr; but
if she was not desired by them because of her lack in fortune and beauty
they left her and married some other woman. So, as they used to leave her
when they had no interest in her, they had no right to marry her if they had
the desire to do so, unless they deal justly with her and gave her a full
amount of Mahr."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 72:
Narrated Sahl:
A woman came to the Prophet,, and presented herself to him (for marriage).
He said, "I am not in need of women these days." Then a man said, "O
Allah's Apostle! Marry her to me." The Prophet asked him, "What have you
got?" He said, "I have got nothing." The Prophet said, "Give her something,
even an iron ring." He said, "I have got nothing." The Prophet asked (him),
"How much of the Quran do you know (by heart)?" He said, "So much and
so much." The Prophet said, "I have married her to you for what you know
of the Quran."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 73:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet decreed that one should not try to cancel a bargain already
agreed upon between some other persons (by offering a bigger price). And
a man should not ask for the hand of a girl who is already engaged to his
Muslim brother, unless the first suitor gives her up, or allows him to ask for
her hand.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 74:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Beware of suspicion (about others), as suspicion is the
falsest talk, and do not spy upon each other, and do not listen to the evil talk
of the people about others' affairs, and do not have enmity with one
another, but be brothers. And none should ask for the hand of a girl who is
already engaged to his (Muslim) brother, but one should wait till the first
suitor marries her or leaves her."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 75:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
"When Hafsa became a widow," Umar said, "I met Abu Bakr and said to him,
'If you wish I will marry Hafsa bint 'Umar to you.' I waited for a few days
then Allah's Apostle asked for her hand. Later Abu Bakr met me and said,
'Nothing stopped me from returning to you concerning your offer except
that I knew that Allah's Apostle had mentioned (his wish to marry) her, and I
could never let out the secret of Allah's Apostle . If he had left her, I would
have accepted her.' "

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 76:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Two men came from the east and delivered speeches, and the Prophet said,
"Some eloquent speech has the in fluency of magic (e.g., some people
refuse to do something and then a good eloquent speaker addresses them
and then they agree to do that very thing after his speech). "

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 77:
Narrated Ar-Rabi':
(the daughter of Muawwidh bin Afra) After the consummation of my
marriage, the Prophet came and sat on my bed as far from me as you are
sitting now, and our little girls started beating the tambourines and reciting
elegiac verses mourning my father who had been killed in the battle of Badr.
One of them said, "Among us is a Prophet who knows what will happen
tomorrow." On that the Prophet said, "Leave this (saying) and keep on
saying the verses which you had been saying before."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 78:
Narrated Anas:
Abdur Rahman bin 'Auf married a woman and gave her gold equal to the
weight of a date stone (as Mahr). When the Prophet noticed the signs of
cheerfulness of the marriage (on his face) and asked him about it, he said, "I
have married a woman and gave (her) gold equal to a date stone in weight
(as Mahr)."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 79:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi:
While I was (sitting) among the people in the company of Allah's Apostle a
woman stood up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! She has given herself in
marriage to you; please give your opinion of her." The Prophet did not give
her any reply. She again stood up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! She has given
herself (in marriage) to you; so please give your opinion of her. The Prophet
did not give her any reply. She again stood up for the third time and said,
"She has given herself in marriage to you: so give your opinion of her." So a
man stood up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Marry her to me." The Prophet
asked him, "Have you got anything?" He said, "No." The Prophet said, "Go
and search for something, even if it were an iron ring." The man went and
searched and then returned saying, "I could not find anything, not even an
iron ring." Then the Prophet said, "Do you know something of the Quran (by
heart)?" He replied, "I know (by heart) such Sura and such Sura." The
Prophet said, "Go! I have married her to you for what you know of the
Quran (by heart)."
Volume 7, Book 62, Number 80:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
The Prophet said to a man, "Marry, even with (a Mahr equal to) an iron
ring."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 81:
Narrated 'Uqba:
The Prophet said: "The stipulations most entitled to be abided by are those
with which you are given the right to enjoy the (women's) private parts (i.e.
the stipulations of the marriage contract)."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 82:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "It is not lawful for a woman (at the time of wedding) to
ask for the divorce of her sister (i.e. the other wife of her would-be husband)
in order to have everything for herself, for she will take only what has been
written for her."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 83:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf came to Allah's Apostle and he had marks of Sufra
(yellow perfume). Allah's Apostle asked him (about those marks).
'AbdurRahman bin Auf told him that he had married a woman from the
Ansar. The Prophet asked, "How much Mahr did you pay her?" He said, "I
paid gold equal to the weight of a date stone." Allah's Apostle said to him,
"Give a wedding banquet, even if with one sheep."
Volume 7, Book 62, Number 84:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet offered a wedding banquet on the occasion of his marriage to
Zainab, and provided a good meal for the Muslims. Then he went out as was
his custom on marrying, he came to the dwelling places of the mothers of
the Believers (i.e. his wives) invoking good (on them), and they were
invoking good (on him). Then he departed (and came back) and saw two
men (still sitting there). So he left again. I do not remember whether I
informed him or he was informed (by somebody else) of their departure)."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 85:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet saw the traces of Sufra (yellow perfume) on Abdur-Rahman bin
'Auf and said, "What is this?" 'Abdur-Rahman, said, "I have married a woman
and have paid gold equal to the weight of a datestone (as her Mahr). The
Prophet said to him, "May Allah bless you: Offer a wedding banquet even
with one sheep."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 86:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When the Prophet married me, my mother came to me and made me enter
the house where I saw some women from the Ansar who said, "May you
prosper and have blessings and have good omen."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 87:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "A prophet among the prophets went for a military
expedition and said to his people: "A man who has married a lady and wants
to consummate his marriage with her and he has not done so yet, should
not accompany me.' "

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 88:
Narrated 'Ursa:
The Prophet wrote the (marriage contract) with 'Aisha while she was six
years old and consummated his marriage with her while she was nine years
old and she remained with him for nine years (i.e. till his death).

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 89:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet stayed for three days at a place between Khaibar and Medina,
and there he consummated his marriage with Safiyya bint Huyay. I invited
the Muslims to a banquet which included neither meat nor bread. The
Prophet ordered for the leather dining sheets to be spread, and then dates,
dried yogurt and butter were provided over it, and that was the Walima
(banquet) of the Prophet. The Muslims asked whether Safiyya would be
considered as his wife or as a slave girl of what his right hands possessed.
Then they said, "If the Prophet screens her from the people, then she Is the
Prophet's wife but if he does not screen her, then she is a slave girl." So
when the Prophet proceeded, he made a place for her (on the camel)
behind him and screened her from people.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 90:
Narrated Aisha:
When the Prophet married me, my mother came to me and made me enter
the house (of the Prophet) and nothing surprised me but the coming of
Allah's Apostle to me in the forenoon.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 91:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "Did you get Anmat?" I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! From
where can we have Anmat?" The Prophet said, "Soon you will have them
Anmat)

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 92p:
Narrated 'Aisha:
that she prepared a lady for a man from the Ansar as his bride and the
Prophet said, "O 'Aisha! Haven't you got any amusement (during the
marriage ceremony) as the Ansar like amusement?"

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 92m:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
"Whenever the Prophet passed by (my mother Um-Sulaim) he used to enter
her and greet her. Anas further said: Once the Prophet way a bridegroom
during his marriage with Zainab, Um Sulaim said to me, "Let us give a gift to
Allah's Apostle ." I said to her, "Do it." So she prepared Haisa (a sweet dish)
made from dates, butter and dried yoghurt and she sent it with me to him. I
took it to him and he said, "Put it down," and ordered me to call some men
whom he named, and to invite whomever I would meet. I did what he
ordered me to do, and when I returned, I found the house crowded with
people and saw the Prophet keeping his hand over the Haisa and saying
over it whatever Allah wished (him to say). Then he called the men in
batches of ten to eat of it, and he said to them, "Mention the Name of Allah,
and each man should eat of the dish the nearest to him." When all of them
had finished their meals, some of them left and a few remained there
talking, over which I felt unhappy. Then the Prophet went out towards the
dwelling places (of his wives) and I too, went out after him and told him that
those people had left. Then he returned and entered his dwelling place and
let the curtains fall while I was in (his) dwelling place, and he was reciting
the Verses:-- 'O you who believe! Enter not the Prophet's house until leave is
given you for a meal, (and then) not (as early as) to what for its preparation.
But when you are invited, enter, and when you have taken your meals,
disperse without sitting for a talk. Verily such (behavior) annoys the
Prophet; and he would be shy of (asking) you (to go), but Allah is not shy of
(telling you) the Truth.' (33-53) Abu Uthman said: Anas said, "I served the
Prophet for ten years."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 93:
Narrated 'Aisha:
that she borrowed a necklace from Asma' and then it got lost. So Allah's
Apostle
sent some people from his companions in search of it. In the meantime the
stated time for the prayer became due and they offered their prayer without
ablution. When they came to the Prophet, they complained about it to him,
so the Verse regarding Tayammum was revealed .
Usaid bin Hudair said, "(O 'Aisha!) may Allah bless you with a good reward,
for by Allah, never did a difficulty happen in connection with you, but Allah
made an escape from it for you, and brought Allah's Blessings for the
Muslims."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 94:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet said, "If anyone of you, when having sexual intercourse with his
wife, says: Bismillah, Allahumma jannibni-Sh-Shaitan wa jannib-ish-Shaitan
ma razaqtana, and if it is destined that they should have a child, then Satan
will never be able to harm him."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 95:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
I was ten years old when Allah's Apostle arrived at Medina. My mother and
aunts used to urge me to serve the Prophet regularly, and I served him for
ten years. When the Prophet died I was twenty years old, and I knew about
the order of Al-Hijab (veiling of ladies) more than any other person when it
was revealed. It was revealed for the first time when Allah's Apostle had
consummated his marriage with Zainab bint Jahsh. When the day dawned,
the Prophet was a bridegroom and he invited the people to a banquet, so
they came, ate, and then all left except a few who remained with the
Prophet for a long time. The Prophet got up and went out, and I too went
out with him so that those people might leave too. The Prophet proceeded
and so did I, till he came to the threshold of 'Aisha's dwelling place. Then
thinking that these people have left by then, he returned and so did I along
with him till he entered upon Zainab and behold, they were still sitting and
had not gone. So the Prophet again went away and I went away along with
him. When we reached the threshold of 'Aisha's dwelling place, he thought
that they had left, and so he returned and I too, returned along with him and
found those people had left. Then the Prophet drew a curtain between me
and him, and the Verses of Al-Hijab were revealed.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 96:
Narrated Anas:
When 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf married an Ansari woman, the Prophet asked
him, "How much Mahr did you give her?" 'Abdur-Rahman said, "Gold equal
to the weight of a date stone." Anas added: When they (i.e. the Prophet and
his companions) arrived at Medina, the emigrants stayed at the Ansar's
houses. 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf stayed at Sad bin Ar-Rabi's house. Sad said
to 'Abdur-Rahman, "I will divide and share my property with you and will
give one of my two wives to you." 'Abdur-Rahman said, "May Allah bless
you, your wives and property (I am not in need of that; but kindly show me
the way to the market)." So 'Abdur-Rahman went to the market and traded
there gaining a profit of some dried yoghurt and butter, and married (an
Ansari woman). The Prophet said to him, "Give a banquet, even if with one
sheep."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 97:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet did not give a better wedding banquet on the occasion of
marrying any of his wives than the one he gave on marrying Zainab, and that
banquet was with (consisted of) one sheep.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 98:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle manumitted Safiyya and then married her, and her Mahr was
her manumission, and he gave a wedding banquet with Hais (a sort of sweet
dish made from butter, cheese and dates).

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 99:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet consummated his marriage with a woman (Zainab), so he sent
me to invite men to the meals.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 100:
Narrated Thabit:
The marriage of Zainab bint Jahash was mentioned in the presence of Anas
and he said, "I did not see the Prophet giving a better banquet on marrying
any of his wives than the one he gave on marrying Zainab. He then gave a
banquet with one sheep."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 101:
Narrated Safiyya bint Shaiba:
The Prophet gave a banquet with two Mudds of barley on marrying some of
his wives. (1 Mudd= 1 3/4 of a kilogram) .

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 102:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "If anyone of you is invites to a wedding banquet, he
must go for it (accept the invitation) ."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 103:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "Set the captives free, accept the invitation (to a wedding
banquet), and visit the patients."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 104:
Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib:
The Prophet ordered us to do seven (things) and forbade us from seven. He
ordered us to visit the patients, to follow the funeral procession, to reply to
the sneezer (i.e., say to him, 'Yarhamuka-l-lah (May Allah bestow His Mercy
upon you), if he says 'Al-hamdulillah' (Praise be to Allah), to help others to
fulfill their oaths, to help the oppressed, to greet (whomever one should
meet), and to accept the invitation (to a wedding banquet). He forbade us
to wear golden rings, to use silver utensils, to use Mayathir (cushions of silk
stuffed with cotton and placed under the rider on the saddle), the Qasiyya
(linen clothes containing silk brought from an Egyptian town), the Istibraq
(thick silk) and the Dibaj (another kind of silk). (See Hadith No. 539 and 753).

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 105:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
Abu Usaid As-Sa'di invited Allah's Apostle to his wedding party and his wife
who was the bride, served them on that day. Do you know what drink she
gave Allah's Apostle? She had soaked some dates for him (in water)
overnight, and when he had finished his meal she gave him that drink (of
soaked dates).

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 106:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The worst food is that of a wedding banquet to which only the rich are
invited while the poor are not invited. And he who refuses an invitation (to a
banquet) disobeys Allah and His Apostle .

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 107:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "If I am invited to a meal of trotters I will accept it; and if I
am given a trotter as a present I will accept it."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 108:
Narrated Nafi':
Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'Accept the marriage
invitation if you are invited to it.' " Ibn 'Umar used to accept the invitation
whether to a wedding banquet or to any other party, even when he was
fasting.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 109:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Once the Prophet saw some women and children coming from a wedding
party. He got up energetically and happily and said, "By Allah! You (i.e., the
Ansar) are the most beloved of all people to me."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 110:
Narrated Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) I bought a cushion having on it pictures (of
animals). When Allah's Apostle saw it, he stood at the door and did not
enter. I noticed the sign of disapproval on his face and said, "O Allah's
Apostle! I repent to Allah and His Apostle. What sin have I committed?'
Allah's Apostle said. "What is this cushion?" I said, "I have bought it for you
so that you may sit on it and recline on it." Allah's Apostle said, "The makers
of these pictures will be punished on the Day of Resurrection, and it will be
said to them, 'Give life to what you have created (i.e., these pictures).' " The
Prophet added, "The Angels of (Mercy) do not enter a house in which there
are pictures (of animals)."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 111:
Narrated Sahl:
When Abu Usaid As-Sa'idi got married, he invited the Prophet and his
companions. None prepared the food for them and brought it to them but
his wife. She soaked some dates in water in a stone pot overnight, and when
the Prophet had finished his food, she provided him with that drink (of
soaked dates).

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 112:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
Abu Usaid As-Sa'idi invited the Prophet to his wedding party and his wife
served him on that day, and she was the bride. She said (or Sahl said), "Do
you know what she soaked for Allah's Apostle? She soaked some dates for
him (in water) in a drinking bowl overnight."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 113:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The woman is like a rib; if you try to straighten her, she
will break. So if you want to get benefit from her, do so while she still has
some crookedness."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 114:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day should not
hurt (trouble) his neighbor. And I advise you to take care of the women, for
they are created from a rib and the most crooked portion of the rib is its
upper part; if you try to straighten it, it will break, and if you leave it, it will
remain crooked, so I urge you to take care of the women."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 115:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
During the lifetime of the Prophet we used to avoid chatting leisurely and
freely with our wives lest some Divine inspiration might be revealed
concerning us. But when the Prophet had died, we started chatting leisurely
and freely (with them).

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 116:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "Everyone of you is a guardian and everyone of you is
responsible (for his wards). A ruler is a guardian and is responsible(for his
subjects); a man is a guardian of his family and responsible (for them); a wife
is a guardian of her husband's house and she is responsible (for it), a slave is
a guardian of his master's property and is responsible (for that). Beware! All
of you are guardians and are responsible (for your wards)."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 117:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Eleven women sat (at a place) and promised and contracted that they would
not conceal anything of the news of their husbands. The first one said, "My
husband is like the meat of a lean weak camel which is kept on the top of a
mountain which is neither easy to climb, nor is the meat fat, so that one
might put up with the trouble of fetching it." The second one said, "I shall
not relate my husband's news, for I fear that I may not be able to finish his
story, for if I describe him, I will mention all his defects and bad traits." The
third one said, "My husband is a tall man; if I describe him (and he hears of
that) he will divorce me, and if I keep quiet, he will neither divorce me nor
treat me as a wife." The fourth one said, "My husband is a moderate person
like the night of Tihama which is neither hot nor cold. I am neither afraid of
him, nor am I discontented with him." The fifth one said, "My husband,
when entering (the house) is a leopard, and when going out, is a lion. He
does not ask about whatever is in the house." The sixth one said, "If my
husband eats. he eats too much (leaving the dishes empty), and if he drinks
he leaves nothing, and if he sleeps he sleeps alone (away from me) covered
in garments and does not stretch his hands here and there so as to know
how I fare (get along)." The seventh one said, "My husband is a wrong-doer
or weak and foolish. All the defects are present in him. He may injure your
head or your body or may do both." The eighth one said, "My husband is
soft to touch like a rabbit and smells like a Zarnab (a kind of good smelling
grass)." The ninth one said, "My husband is a tall generous man wearing a
long strap for carrying his sword. His ashes are abundant and his house is
near to the people who would easily consult him." The tenth one said, "My
husband is Malik, and what is Malik? Malik is greater than whatever I say
about him. (He is beyond and above all praises which can come to my mind).
Most of his camels are kept at home (ready to be slaughtered for the
guests) and only a few are taken to the pastures. When the camels hear the
sound of the lute (or the tambourine) they realize that they are going to be
slaughtered for the guests." The eleventh one said, "My husband is Abu Zar
and what is Abu Zar (i.e., what should I say about him)? He has given me
many ornaments and my ears are heavily loaded with them and my arms
have become fat (i.e., I have become fat). And he has pleased me, and I have
become so happy that I feel proud of myself. He found me with my family
who were mere owners of sheep and living in poverty, and brought me to a
respected family having horses and camels and threshing and purifying grain
. Whatever I say, he does not rebuke or insult me. When I sleep, I sleep till
late in the morning, and when I drink water (or milk), I drink my fill. The
mother of Abu Zar and what may one say in praise of the mother of Abu Zar?
Her saddle bags were always full of provision and her house was spacious.
As for the son of Abu Zar, what may one say of the son of Abu Zar? His bed is
as narrow as an unsheathed sword and an arm of a kid (of four months)
satisfies his hunger. As for the daughter of Abu Zar, she is obedient to her
father and to her mother. She has a fat well-built body and that arouses the
jealousy of her husband's other wife. As for the (maid) slave girl of Abu Zar,
what may one say of the (maid) slavegirl of Abu Zar? She does not uncover
our secrets but keeps them, and does not waste our provisions and does not
leave the rubbish scattered everywhere in our house." The eleventh lady
added, "One day it so happened that Abu Zar went out at the time when the
milk was being milked from the animals, and he saw a woman who had two
sons like two leopards playing with her two breasts. (On seeing her) he
divorced me and married her. Thereafter I married a noble man who used to
ride a fast tireless horse and keep a spear in his hand. He gave me many
things, and also a pair of every kind of livestock and said, 'Eat (of this), O Um
Zar, and give provision to your relatives." She added, "Yet, all those things
which my second husband gave me could not fill the smallest utensil of Abu
Zar's." 'Aisha then said: Allah's Apostle said to me, "I am to you as Abu Zar
was to his wife Um Zar."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 118:
Narrated 'Ursa:
Aisha said, "While the Ethiopians were playing with their small spears,
Allah's Apostle screened me behind him and I watched (that display) and
kept on watching till I left on my own." So you may estimate of what age a
little girl may listen to amusement.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 119:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas :
I had been eager to ask 'Umar bin Al-Khattab about the two ladies from
among the wives of the Prophet regarding whom Allah said 'If you two
(wives of the Prophet namely Aisha and Hafsa) turn in repentance to Allah,
your hearts are indeed so inclined (to oppose what the Prophet likes). (66.4)
till 'Umar performed the Hajj and I too, performed the Hajj along with him.
(On the way) 'Umar went aside to answer the call of nature, and I also went
aside along with him carrying a tumbler full of water, and when 'Umar had
finished answering the call of nature, I poured water over his hands and he
performed the ablution. Then I said to him, "O chief of the Believers! Who
were the two ladies from among the wives of the Prophet regarding whom
Allah said: 'If you two (wives of the Prophet) turn in repentance to Allah
your hearts are indeed so inclined (to oppose what the Prophet likes)?"
(66.4) He said, "I am astonished at your question, O Ibn Abbas. They were
'Aisha and Hafsa." Then 'Umar went on narrating the Hadith and said, "I and
an Ansari neighbor of mine from Bani Umaiyya bin Zaid who used to live in
Awali-al-Medina, used to visit the Prophet in turn. He used to go one day and
I another day. When I went, I would bring him the news of what had
happened that day regarding the Divine Inspiration and other things, and
when he went, he used to do the same for me. We, the people of Quraish
used to have the upper hand over our wives, but when we came to the
Ansar, we found that their women had the upper hand over their men, so
our women also started learning the ways of the Ansari women. I shouted at
my wife and she retorted against me and I disliked that she should answer
me back. She said to me, 'Why are you so surprised at my answering you
back? By Allah, the wives of the Prophet answer him back and some of them
may leave (does not speak to) him throughout the day till the night.' The
(talk) scared me and I said to her, 'Whoever has done so will be ruined!'
Then I proceeded after dressing myself, and entered upon Hafsa and said to
her, 'Does anyone of you keep the Prophet angry till night?' She said, 'Yes.' I
said, 'You are a ruined losing person! Don't you fear that Allah may get angry
for the anger of Allah's Apostle and thus you will be ruined? So do not ask
more from the Prophet and do not answer him back and do not give up
talking to him. Ask me whatever you need and do not be tempted to imitate
your neighbor (i.e., 'Aisha) in her manners for she is more charming than you
and more beloved to the Prophet ." Umar added,"At that time a talk was
circulating among us that (the tribe of) Ghassan were preparing their horses
to invade us. My Ansari companion, on the day of his turn, went (to the
town) and returned to us at night and knocked at my door violently and
asked if I was there. I became horrified and came out to him. He said, 'Today
a great thing has happened.' I asked, 'What is it? Have (the people of)
Ghassan come?' He said, 'No, but (What has happened) is greater and more
horrifying than that: Allah's Apostle; has divorced his wives. 'Umar added,
"The Prophet kept away from his wives and I said "Hafsa is a ruined loser.' I
had already thought that most probably this (divorce) would happen in the
near future. So I dressed myself and offered the morning prayer with the
Prophet and then the Prophet; entered an upper room and stayed there in
seclusion. I entered upon Hafsa and saw her weeping. I asked, 'What makes
you weep? Did I not warn you about that? Did the Prophet divorce you all?'
She said, 'I do not know. There he is retired alone in the upper room.' I came
out and sat near the pulpit and saw a group of people sitting around it and
some of them were weeping. I sat with them for a while but could not
endure the situation, so I went to the upper room where the Prophet; was
and said to a black slave of his, 'Will you get the permission (of the Prophet )
for 'Umar (to enter)?' The slave went in, talked to the Prophet about it and
then returned saying, 'I have spoken to the Prophet and mentioned you but
he kept quiet.' Then I returned and sat with the group of people sitting near
the pulpit. but I could not bear the situation and once again I said to the
slave, 'Will you get the permission for 'Umar?' He went in and returned
saying, 'I mentioned you to him but he kept quiet.' So I returned again and
sat with the group of people sitting near the pulpit, but I could not bear the
situation, and so I went to the slave and said, 'Will you get the permission
for 'Umar?' He went in and returned to me saying, 'I mentioned you to him
but he kept quiet.' When I was leaving, behold! The slave called me, saying,
'The Prophet has given you permission.' Then I entered upon Allah's Apostle
and saw him Lying on a bed made of stalks of date palm leaves and there
was no bedding between it and him. The stalks left marks on his side and he
was leaning on a leather pillow stuffed with date-palm fires. I greeted him
and while still standing I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Have you divorced your
wives?' He looked at me and said, 'No.' I said, 'Allah Akbar!' And then, while
still standing, I said chatting, 'Will you heed what I say, O Allah's Apostle?
We, the people of Quraish used to have power over our women, but when
we arrived at Medina we found that the men (here) were overpowered by
their women.' The Prophet smiled and then I said to him, 'Will you heed
what I say, O Allah's Apostle? I entered upon Hafsa and said to her, "Do not
be tempted to imitate your companion ('Aisha), for she is more charming
than you and more beloved to the Prophet.' " The Prophet smiled for a
second time. When I saw him smiling, I sat down. Then I looked around his
house, and by Allah, I could not see anything of importance in his house
except three hides, so I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah to make your
followers rich, for the Persians and the Romans have been made prosperous
and they have been given (the pleasures of the world), although they do not
worship Allah.' Thereupon the Prophet sat up as he was reclining. and said,
'Are you of such an opinion, O the son of Al-Khattab? These are the people
who have received the rewards for their good deeds in this world.' I said, 'O
Allah's Apostle! Ask Allah to forgive me.' Then the Prophet kept away from
his wives for twenty-nine days because of the story which Hafsa had
disclosed to 'Aisha. The Prophet had said, 'I will not enter upon them (my
wives) for one month,' because of his anger towards them, when Allah had
admonished him. So, when twenty nine days had passed, the Prophet first
entered upon 'Aisha. 'Aisha said to him, 'O Allah's Apostle! You had sworn
that you would not enter upon us for one month, but now only twenty-nine
days have passed, for I have been counting them one by one.' The Prophet
said, 'The (present) month is of twenty nine days.' 'Aisha added, 'Then Allah
revealed the Verses of the option. (2) And out of all his-wives he asked me
first, and I chose him.' Then he gave option to his other wives and they said
what 'Aisha had said . " (1) The Prophet, ' had decided to abstain from eating
a certain kind of food because of a certain event, so Allah blamed him for
doing so. Some of his wives were the cause of him taking that decision,
therefore he deserted them for one month. See Quran: (66.4)

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 120:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "A woman should not fast (optional fasts) except with her
husband's permission if he is at home (staying with her)."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 121:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "If a man Invites his wife to sleep with him and she refuses
to come to him, then the angels send their curses on her till morning."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 122:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "If a woman spends the night deserting her husband's bed
(does not sleep with him), then the angels send their curses on her till she
comes back (to her husband)."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 123:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "It is not lawful for a lady to fast (Nawafil) without the
permission of her husband when he is at home; and she should not allow
anyone to enter his house except with his permission; and if she spends of
his wealth (on charitable purposes) without being ordered by him, he will
get half of the reward."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 124:
Narrated Usama:
The Prophet said, "I stood at the gate of Paradise and saw that the majority
of the people who entered it were the poor, while the wealthy were
stopped at the gate (for the accounts). But the companions of the Fire were
ordered to be taken to the Fire. Then I stood at the gate of the Fire and saw
that the majority of those who entered it were women."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 125:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abbas:
During the lifetime of Allah's Apostle, the sun eclipsed. Allah's Apostle
offered the prayer of (the) eclipse) and so did the people along with him. He
performed a long Qiyam (standing posture) during which Surat-al-Baqara
could have been recited; then he performed a pro-longed bowing, then
raised his head and stood for a long time which was slightly less than that of
the first Qiyam (and recited Qur'an). Then he performed a prolonged
bowing again but the period was shorter than the period of the first bowing,
then he stood up and then prostrated. Again he stood up, but this time the
period of standing was less than the first standing. Then he performed a
prolonged bowing but of a lesser duration than the first, then he stood up
again for a long time but for a lesser duration than the first. Then he
performed a prolonged bowing but of lesser duration than the first, and
then he again stood up, and then prostrated and then finished his prayer. By
then the sun eclipse had cleared. The Prophet then said, "The sun and the
moon are two signs among the signs of Allah, and they do not eclipse
because of the death or birth of someone, so when you observe the eclipse,
remember Allah (offer the eclipse prayer)." They (the people) said, "O
Allah's Apostle! We saw you stretching your hand to take something at this
place of yours, then we saw you stepping backward." He said, "I saw
Paradise (or Paradise was shown to me), and I stretched my hand to pluck a
bunch (of grapes), and had I plucked it, you would have eaten of it as long as
this world exists. Then I saw the (Hell) Fire, and I have never before, seen
such a horrible sight as that, and I saw that the majority of its dwellers were
women." The people asked, "O Allah's Apostle! What is the reason for that?"
He replied, "Because of their ungratefulness." It was said. "Do they
disbelieve in Allah (are they ungrateful to Allah)?" He replied, "They are not
thankful to their husbands and are ungrateful for the favors done to them.
Even if you do good to one of them all your life, when she seems some
harshness from you, she will say, "I have never seen any good from you.' "

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 126:
Narrated Imran:
The Prophet said, "I looked at Paradise and saw that the majority of its
residents were the poor; and I looked at the (Hell) Fire and saw that the
majority of its residents were women."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 127:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As:
Allah's Apostle said, "O 'Abdullah! Have I not been formed that you fast all
the day and stand in prayer all night?" I said, "Yes, O Allah's Apostle!" He
said, "Do not do that! Observe the fast sometimes and also leave them (the
fast) at other times; stand up for the prayer at night and also sleep at night.
Your body has a right over you, your eyes have a right over you and your
wife has a right over you."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 128:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "All of you are guardians and are responsible for your
wards. The ruler is a guardian and the man is a guardian of his family; the
lady is a guardian and is responsible for her husband's house and his
offspring; and so all of you are guardians and are responsible for your
wards."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 129:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle took an oath that he would not visit his wives for one month,
and he sat in an upper room belonging to him. Then, on the twenty ninth
day he came down. It was said, "O Allah's Apostle! You had taken an oath
not to visit your wives for one month." He said, "The (present) month is of
twenty-nine days."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 130:
Narrated Um Salama:
The Prophet took an oath that he would not enter upon some of his wives
for one month. But when twenty nine days had elapsed, he went to them in
the morning or evening. It was said to him, "O Allah's Prophet! You had
taken an oath that you would not enter upon them for one month." He
replied, "The month can be of twenty nine days."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 131:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
One morning we saw the wives of the Prophet weeping, and everyone of
them had her family with her, I went to the mosque and found that it was
crowded with people. Then 'Umar bin Al-Khattab came and went up to the
Prophet who was in his upper room. He greeted him but nobody answered.
He greeted again, but nobody answered. Then the gatekeeper called him
and he entered upon the Prophet, and asked, "Have you divorced your
wives?" The Prophet, said, "No, but I have taken an oath not to go to them
for one month." So the Prophet stayed away (from his wives) for twenty
nine days and then entered upon them.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 132:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zam'a:
The Prophet said, "None of you should flog his wife as he flogs a slave and
then have sexual intercourse with her in the last part of the day."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 133:
Narrated 'Aisha:
An Ansari woman gave her daughter in marriage and the hair of the latter
started falling out. The Ansari women came to the Prophet and mentioned
that to him and said, "Her (my daughter's) husband suggested that I should
let her wear false hair." The Prophet said, "No, (don't do that) for Allah
sends His curses upon such ladies who lengthen their hair artificially."
Volume 7, Book 62, Number 134:
Narrated Aisha:
regarding the Verse: 'If a wife fears cruelty or desertion on her husband's
part ...') (4.128) It concerns the woman whose husband does not want to
keep her with him any longer, but wants to divorce her and marry some
other lady, so she says to him: 'Keep me and do not divorce me, and then
marry another woman, and you may neither spend on me, nor sleep with
me.' This is indicated by the Statement of Allah: 'There is no blame on them
if they arrange an amicable settlement between them both, and (such)
settlement is better." (4.128)

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 135:
Narrated Jabir:
We used to practice coitus interrupt us during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle
.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 136:
Narrated Jabir:
We used to practice coitus interrupt us while the Quran was being revealed.
Jabir added: We used to practice coitus interrupt us during the lifetime of
Allah's Apostle while the Quran was being Revealed.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 137:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
We got female captives in the war booty and we used to do coitus
interruptus with them. So we asked Allah's Apostle about it and he said, "Do
you really do that?" repeating the question thrice, "There is no soul that is
destined to exist but will come into existence, till the Day of Resurrection."
Volume 7, Book 62, Number 138:
Narrated al-Qasim:
Aisha said that whenever the Prophet intended to go on a journey, he drew
lots among his wives (so as to take one of them along with him). During one
of his journeys the lot fell on 'Aisha and Hafsa. When night fell the Prophet
would ride beside 'Aisha and talk with her. One night Hafsa said to 'Aisha,
"Won't you ride my camel tonight and I ride yours, so that you may see (me)
and I see (you) (in new situation)?" 'Aisha said, "Yes, (I agree.)" So 'Aisha
rode, and then the Prophet came towards 'Aisha's camel on which Hafsa
was riding. He greeted Hafsa and then proceeded (beside her) till they
dismounted (on the way). 'Aisha missed him, and so, when they
dismounted, she put her legs in the Idhkhir and said, "O Lord (Allah)! Send a
scorpion or a snake to bite me for I am not to blame him (the Prophet ).

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 139:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Sada bint Zam'a gave up her turn to me ('Aisha), and so the Prophet used to
give me ('Aisha) both my day and the day of Sad;

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 140:
Narrated Anas:
The tradition, (of the Prophet) is that if someone marries a virgin and he has
already a matron wife (with him), then he should stay with the virgin for
seven days; and if someone marries a matron (and he has already a virgin
wife with him) then he should stay with her for three days.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 141:
Narrated Anas:
It is the Prophet's tradition that if someone marries a virgin and he has
already a matron wife then he should stay for seven days with her (the
virgin) and then by turns; and if someone marries a matron and he has
already a virgin wife then he should stay with her (the matron) for three
days, and then by turns.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 142:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet used to pass by (have sexual relation with) all his wives in one
night, and at that time he had nine wives.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 143:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Whenever Allah's Apostle finished his 'Asr prayer, he would enter upon his
wives and stay with one of them. One day he went to Hafsa and stayed with
her longer than usual.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 144:
Narrated 'Aisha:
that during his fatal ailment, Allah's Apostle, used to ask his wives, "Where
shall I stay tomorrow? Where shall I stay tomorrow?" He was looking
forward to Aisha's turn. So all his wives allowed him to stay where he
wished, and he stayed at 'Aisha's house till he died there. 'Aisha added: He
died on the day of my usual turn at my house. Allah took him unto Him while
his head was between my chest and my neck and his saliva was mixed with
my saliva.
Volume 7, Book 62, Number 145:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
that 'Umar entered upon Hafsa and said, "O my daughter! Do not be misled
by the manners of her who is proud of her beauty because of the love of
Allah's Apostle for her." By 'her' he meant 'Aisha. 'Umar added, "Then I told
that to Allah's Apostle and he smiled (on hearing that)."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 146:
Narrated Asma:
Some lady said, "O Allah's Apostle! My husband has another wife, so it is
sinful of me to claim that he has given me what he has not given me (in
order to tease her)?" Allah's Apostle said, The one who pretends that he has
been given what he has not been given, is just like the (false) one who wears
two garments of falsehood."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 147:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Masud:
The Prophet, said, "There is none having a greater sense of Ghira than Allah.
And for that He has forbidden the doing of evil actions (illegal sexual
intercourse etc.) There is none who likes to be praised more than Allah
does."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 148:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said, "O followers of Muhammad! There is none, who has a
greater sense of Ghira (self-respect) than Allah, so He has forbidden that His
slave commits illegal sexual intercourse or His slave girl commits illegal
sexual intercourse. O followers of Muhammad! If you but knew what I
know, you would laugh less and weep more!"

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 149:
Narrated Asma':
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "There is nothing (none) having a greater
sense of Ghira (self-respect) than Allah." And narrated Abu Huraira that he
heard the Prophet (saying the same).

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 150:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet; said, "Allah has a sense of Ghira, and Allah's sense of Ghira is
provoked when a believer does something which Allah has prohibited."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 151:
Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr:
When Az-Zubair married me, he had no real property or any slave or
anything else except a camel which drew water from the well, and his horse.
I used to feed his horse with fodder and drew water and sew the bucket for
drawing it, and prepare the dough, but I did not know how to bake bread.
So our Ansari neighbors used to bake bread for me, and they were
honorable ladies. I used to carry the date stones on my head from Zubair's
land given to him by Allah's Apostle and this land was two third Farsakh
(about two miles) from my house. One day, while I was coming with the
date stones on my head, I met Allah's Apostle along with some Ansari
people. He called me and then, (directing his camel to kneel down) said,
"Ikh! Ikh!" so as to make me ride behind him (on his camel). I felt shy to
travel with the men and remembered Az-Zubair and his sense of Ghira, as he
was one of those people who had the greatest sense of Ghira. Allah's
Apostle noticed that I felt shy, so he proceeded. I came to Az-Zubair and
said, "I met Allah's Apostle while I was carrying a load of date stones on my
head, and he had some companions with him. He made his camel kneel
down so that I might ride, but I felt shy in his presence and remembered
your sense of Ghira (See the glossary). On that Az-Zubair said, "By Allah,
your carrying the date stones (and you being seen by the Prophet in such a
state) is more shameful to me than your riding with him." (I continued
serving in this way) till Abu Bakr sent me a servant to look after the horse,
whereupon I felt as if he had set me free.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 152:
Narrated Anas:
While the Prophet was in the house of one of his wives, one of the mothers
of the believers sent a meal in a dish. The wife at whose house the Prophet
was, struck the hand of the servant, causing the dish to fall and break. The
Prophet gathered the broken pieces of the dish and then started collecting
on them the food which had been in the dish and said, "Your mother (my
wife) felt jealous." Then he detained the servant till a (sound) dish was
brought from the wife at whose house he was. He gave the sound dish to
the wife whose dish had been broken and kept the broken one at the house
where it had been broken.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 153:
Narrated Jabir:
The Prophet, said, "I entered Paradise and saw a palace and asked whose
palace is this? They (the Angels) said, "This palace belongs to 'Umar bin AlKhattab.' I intended to enter it, and nothing stopped me except my
knowledge about your sense of Ghira (self-respect (O Umar)." 'Umar said,
"O Allah's Apostle! Let my father and mother be sacrificed for you! O Allah's
Prophet! How dare I think of my Ghira (self-respect) being offended by
you?"
Volume 7, Book 62, Number 154:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
While we were sitting with Allah's Apostle, (he) Allah's Apostle said, "While I
was sleeping, I saw a woman performing ablution beside a palace. I asked,
"Whose palace is this?' It was said, 'This palace belongs to 'Umar.' Then I
remembered his sense of Ghira and returned." On that 'Umar started
weeping in that gathering and said, "O Allah's Apostle! How dare I think of
my self-respect being offended by you?"

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 155:
Narrated Aisha:
That Allah's Apostle said to her, "I you are pleased with me or angry with
me." I said, "Whence do you know that?" He said, "When you are pleased
with me, you say, 'No, by the Lord of Muhammad,' but when you are angry
with me, then you say, 'No, by the Lord of Abraham.' " Thereupon I said,
"Yes (you are right), but by Allah, O Allah's Apostle, I leave nothing but your
name."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 156:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I never felt so jealous of any wife of Allah's Apostle as I did of Khadija
because Allah's Apostle used to remember and praise her too often and
because it was revealed to Allah's Apostle that he should give her (Khadija)
the glad tidings of her having a palace of Qasab in Paradise .

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 157:
Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:
I heard Allah's Apostle who was on the pulpit, saying, "Banu Hisham bin AlMughira have requested me to allow them to marry their daughter to Ali bin
Abu Talib, but I don't give permission, and will not give permission unless 'Ali
bin Abi Talib divorces my daughter in order to marry their daughter, because
Fatima is a part of my body, and I hate what she hates to see, and what
hurts her, hurts me."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 158:
Narrated Anas:
I will narrate to you a Habith I heard from Allah's Apostle and none other
than I will tell you of it. I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "From among the
portents of the Hour are the following: Religious knowledge will be taken
away; General ignorance (in religious matters) will increase; illegal Sexual
intercourse will prevail: Drinking of alcoholic drinks will prevail. Men will
decrease in number, and women will increase in number, so much so that
fifty women will be looked after by one man."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 159:
Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir:
Allah's Apostle said, "Beware of entering upon the ladies." A man from the
Ansar said, "Allah's Apostle! What about Al-Hamu the in-laws of the wife
(the brothers of her husband or his nephews etc.)?" The Prophet replied:
The in-laws of the wife are death itself.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 160:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas :
The Prophet said, "No man should stay with a lady in seclusion except in the
presence of a Dhu-Muhram." A man stood up and said, "O Allah's Apostle!
My wife has gone out intending to perform the Hajj and I have been enrolled
(in the army) for such-and-such campaign." The Prophet said, "Return and
perform the Hajj with your wife."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 161:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
An Ansari woman came to the Prophet and he took her aside and said (to
her). "By Allah, you (Ansar) are the most beloved people to me."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 162:
Narrated Um Salama:
that while the Prophet was with her, there was an effeminate man in the
house. The effeminate man said to Um Salama's brother, 'Abdullah bin Abi
Umaiyya, "If Allah should make you conquer Ta'if tomorrow, I recommend
that you take the daughter of Ghailan (in marriage) for (she is so fat) that
she shows four folds of flesh when facing you and eight when she turns her
back." Thereupon the Prophet said (to us), "This (effeminate man) should
not enter upon you (anymore)."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 163:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet was screening me with his Rida' (garment covering the upper
part of the body) while I was looking at the Ethiopians who were playing in
the courtyard of the mosque. (I continued watching) till I was satisfied. So
you may deduce from this event how a little girl (who has not reached the
age of puberty) who is eager to enjoy amusement should be treated in this
respect.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 164:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Once Sada bint Zam'a went out at night for some need, and 'Umar saw her,
and recognizing her, he said (to her), "By Allah, O Sada! You cannot hide
yourself from us." So she returned to the Prophet and mentioned that to
him while he was sitting in my dwelling taking his supper and holding a bone
covered with meat in his hand. Then the Divine Inspiration was revealed to
him and when that state was over, he (the Prophet was saying: "O women!
You have been allowed by Allah to go out for your needs."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 165:
Narrated Salim's father:
The Prophet said, "If the wife of anyone of you asks permission to go to the
mosque, he should not forbid her."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 166:
Narrated 'Aisha:
My foster uncle came and asked permission (to enter) but I refused to admit
him till I asked Allah's Apostle about that. He said, "He is your uncle, so allow
him to come in." I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have been suckled by a woman
and not by a man." Allah's Apostle said, "He is your uncle, so let him enter
upon you." And that happened after the order of Al-Hijab (compulsory
veiling) was revealed. All things which become unlawful because of blood
relations are unlawful because of the corresponding foster suckling
relations.

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 167:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud:
The Prophet said, "A woman should not look at or touch another woman to
describe her to her
husband in such a way as if he was actually looking at her."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 168:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "A woman should not look at or touch another woman to
describe her to her husband in such a way as if he was actually looking at
her."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 169:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
(The Prophet) Solomon son of (the Prophet) David said, "Tonight I will go
round (i.e. have sexual relations with) one hundred women (my wives)
everyone of whom will deliver a male child who will fight in Allah's Cause."
On that an Angel said to him, "Say: 'If Allah will.' " But Solomon did not say it
and forgot to say it. Then he had sexual relations with them but none of
them delivered any child except one who delivered a half person. The
Prophet said, "If Solomon had said: 'If Allah will,' Allah would have fulfilled
his (above) desire and that saying would have made him more hopeful."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 170:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
The Prophet disliked that one should go to one's family at night (on
returning from a journey).

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 171:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "When anyone of you is away from his house for a long
time, he should not return to his family at night."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 172:
Narrated Jabir:
I was with Allah's Apostle in a Ghazwa, and when we returned, I wanted to
hurry, while riding a slow camel. A rider came behind me. I looked back and
saw that the rider was Allah's Apostle . He said (to me), "What makes you in
such a hurry?" I replied, "I am newly married." He said, "Did you marry a
virgin or a matron?" I replied, "(Not a virgin but) a matron." He said, "Why
didn't you marry a young girl with whom you could play and who could play
with you?" Then when we approached (Medina) and were going to enter
(it), the Prophet said, "Wait till you enter (your homes) at night (in the first
part of the night) so that the ladies with unkempt hair may comb their hair,
and those whose husbands have been absent (for a long time) may shave
their pubic hair." (The sub-narrator, Hashim said: A reliable narrator told me
that the Prophet added in this Hadith: "(Seek to beget) children! Children, O
Jabir!")

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 173:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "If you enter (your town) at night (after coming from a
journey), do not enter upon your family till the woman whose husband was
absent (from the house) shaves her pubic hair and the woman with
unkempt hair, combs her hair" Allah's Apostle further said, "(O Jabir!) Seek
to have offspring, seek to have offspring!"

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 174:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
We were with the Prophet in Ghazwa, and when we returned and
approached Medina, I wanted to hurry while riding a slow camel. A rider
overtook me and pricked my camel with a spear which he had, whereupon
my camel started running as fast as any other fast camel you may see. I
looked back, and behold, the rider was Allah's Apostle . I said, "O Allah's
Apostle! I am newly married " He asked, "Have you got married?" I replied,
"Yes." He said, "A virgin or a matron?" I replied, "(Not a virgin) but a
matron" He said, "Why didn't you marry a young girl so that you could play
with her and she with you?" When we reached (near Medina) and were
going to enter it, the Prophet said, "Wait till you enter your home early in
the night so that the lady whose hair is unkempt may comb her hair and that
the lady whose husband has been away may shave her pubic hair."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 175:
Narrated Abu Hazim:
The people differed about the type of treatment which had been given to
Allah's Apostle on the day (of the battle) of Uhud. So they asked Sahl bin
Sad As-Sa'id who was the only surviving Companion (of the Prophet) at
Medina.
He replied, "Nobody Is left at Medina who knows it better than I. Fatima was
washing the blood off his face and 'Ali was bringing water in his shield, and
then a mat of date-palm leaves was burnt and (the ash) was inserted into
the wound."

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 176:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Abis:
I heard Ibn 'Abbas answering a man who asked him, "Did you attend the
prayer of 'Id al Adha or 'Id-al-Fitr with Allah's Apostle?"
Ibn 'Abbas replied, "Yes, and had it not been for my close relationship with
him, I could not have offered it." (That was because of his young age). Ibn
'Abbas further said, Allah's Apostle went out and offered the Id prayer and
then delivered the sermon."
Ibn 'Abbas did not mention anything about the Adhan (the call for prayer) or
the Iqama.
He added, "Then the Prophet went to the women and instructed them and
gave them religious advice and ordered them to give alms and I saw them
reaching out (their hands to) their ears and necks (to take off the earrings
and necklaces, etc.) and throwing (it) towards Bilal.
Then the Prophet returned with Bilal to his house . "

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 177:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Abu Bakr admonished me and poked me with his hands in the flank, and
nothing stopped me from moving at that time except the position of Allah's
Apostle whose head was on my thigh.
BOOK 63. DIVORCE (178-262)
Volume 7, Book 63, Number 178:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
that he had divorced his wife while she was menstruating during the lifetime
of Allah's Apostle . 'Umar bin Al-Khattab asked Allah's Apostle about that.
Allah's Apostle said, "Order him (your son) to take her back and keep her till
she is clean and then to wait till she gets her next period and becomes clean
again, whereupon, if he wishes to keep her, he can do so, and if he wishes to
divorce her he can divorce her before having sexual intercourse with her;
and that is the prescribed period which Allah has fixed for the women meant
to be divorced."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 179:
Narrated Anas bin Sirin:
Ibn 'Umar said: "I divorced my wife while she was menstruating. 'Umar
mentioned that to the Prophet . The Prophet said, (to my father), "Let your
son take her back." I asked (Ibn 'Umar), "Is such a divorce counted (i.e. as
one legal divorce)?" Ibn 'Umar said, "Of course." Narrated Yunus bin Jubair:
Ibn 'Umar said, "The Prophet said to 'Umar, 'Order him (Ibn 'Umar) to take
her back.' " I asked, "Is such a divorce counted (as one legal divorce)?" Ibn
'Umar said, "What do you think if someone becomes helpless and foolish?"

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 180:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
(Divorcing my wife during her menses) was counted as one legal divorce.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 181:
Narrated Al-Awza:
I asked Az-Zuhri, "Which of the wives of the Prophet sought refuge with
Allah from him?" He said "I was told by 'Ursa that 'Aisha said, 'When the
daughter of Al-Jaun was brought to Allah's Apostle (as his bride) and he
went near her, she said, "I seek refuge with Allah from you." He said, "You
have sought refuge with The Great; return to your family."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 182:
Narrated Abu Usaid:
We went out with the Prophet to a garden called Ash-Shaut till we reached
two walls between which we sat down. The Prophet said, "Sit here," and
went in (the garden). The Jauniyya (a lady from Bani Jaun) had been
brought and lodged in a house in a date-palm garden in the home of
Umaima bint An-Nu'man bin Sharahil, and her wet nurse was with her. When
the Prophet entered upon her, he said to her, "Give me yourself (in
marriage) as a gift." She said, "Can a princess give herself in marriage to an
ordinary man?" The Prophet raised his hand to pat her so that she might
become tranquil. She said, "I seek refuge with Allah from you." He said, "You
have sought refuge with One Who gives refuge. Then the Prophet came out
to us and said, "O Abu Usaid! Give her two white linen dresses to wear and
let her go back to her family." Narrated Sahl and Abu Usaid: The Prophet
married Umaima bint Sharahil, and when she was brought to him, he
stretched his hand towards her. It seemed that she disliked that, whereupon
the Prophet ordered Abu Usaid to prepare her and to provide her with two
white linen dresses. (See Hadith No. 541).

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 183:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
similarly as above (182).
Volume 7, Book 63, Number 184:
Narrated Abi Ghallab Yunus bin Jubair:
I asked Ibn 'Umar,"(What is said regarding) a man divorces his wife during
her period?" He said, "Do you know Ibn 'Umar? Ibn 'Umar divorced his wife
while she was menstruating. 'Umar then went to the Prophet and
mentioned that to him. The Prophet ordered him to take her back and when
she became clean, he could divorce her if he wanted." I asked (Ibn 'Umar),
"Was that divorce counted as one legal divorce?" He said, "If one becomes
helpless and foolish (will he be excused? Of course not). "

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 185:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi:
Uwaimir Al-'Ajlani came to 'Asim bin Adi Al-Ansari and asked, "O 'Asim! Tell
me, if a man sees his wife with another man, should he kill him, whereupon
you would kill him in Qisas, or what should he do? O 'Asim! Please ask Allah's
Apostle about that." 'Asim asked Allah's Apostle about that. Allah's Apostle
disliked that question and considered it disgraceful. What 'Asim heard from
Allah's Apostle was hard on him. When he returned to his family, 'Uwaimir
came to him and said "O 'Asim! What did Allah's Apostle say to you?" 'Asim
said, "You never bring me any good. Allah's Apostle disliked to hear the
problem which I asked him about." 'Uwaimir said, "By Allah, I will not leave
the matter till I ask him about it." So 'Uwaimir proceeded till he came to
Allah's Apostle who was in the midst of the people and said, "O Allah's
Apostle! If a man finds with his wife another man, should he kill him,
whereupon you would kill him (in Qisas): or otherwise, what should he do?"
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah has revealed something concerning the question
of you and your wife. Go and bring her here." So they both carried out the
judgment of Lian, while I was present among the people (as a witness).
When both of them had finished, 'Uwaimir said, "O Allah's Apostle! If I
should now keep my wife with me, then I have told a lie". Then he
pronounced his decision to divorce her thrice before Allah's Apostle ordered
him to do so. (Ibn Shihab said, "That was the tradition for all those who are
involved in a case of Lian."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 186:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The wife of Rifa'a Al-Qurazi came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Rifa'a divorced me irrevocably. After him I married 'Abdur-Rahman
bin Az-Zubair Al-Qurazi who proved to be impotent." Allah's Apostle said to
her, "Perhaps you want to return to Rifa'a? Nay (you cannot return to Rifa'a)
until you and 'Abdur-Rahman consummate your marriage."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 187:
Narrated 'Aisha:
A man divorced his wife thrice (by expressing his decision to divorce her
thrice), then she married another man who also divorced her. The Prophet
was asked if she could legally marry the first husband (or not). The Prophet
replied, "No, she cannot marry the first husband unless the second husband
consummates his marriage with her, just as the first husband had done."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 188:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle gave us the option (to remain with him or to be divorced)
and we selected Allah and His Apostle . So, giving us that option was not
regarded as divorce.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 189:
Narrated Musruq:
I asked 'Aisha about the option: She said, "The Prophet gave us the option.
Do you think that option was considered as a divorce?" I said, "It matters
little to me if I give my wife the option once or a hundred times after she has
chosen me."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 190:
Narrated 'Aisha:
A man divorced his wife and she married another man who proved to be
impotent and divorced her. She could not get her satisfaction from him, and
after a while he divorced her. Then she came to the Prophet and said, "O
Allah's Apostle! My first husband divorced me and then I married another
man who entered upon me to consummate his marriage but he proved to
be impotent and did not approach me except once during which he
benefited nothing from me. Can I remarry my first husband in this case?"
Allah's Apostle said, "It is unlawful to marry your first husband till the other
husband consummates his marriage with you."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 191:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
that he heard Ibn 'Abbas saying, "If a man makes his wife unlawful for him, it
does not mean that she is divorced." He added, "Indeed in the Apostle of
Allah , you have a good example to follow."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 192:
Narrated 'Ubaid bin 'Umar:
I heard 'Aisha saying, "The Prophet used to stay for a long while with Zanab
bint Jahsh and drink honey at her house. So Hafsa and I decided that if the
Prophet came to anyone of us, she should say him, "I detect the smell of
Maghafir (a nasty smelling gum) in you. Have you eaten Maghafir?' " So the
Prophet visited one of them and she said to him similarly. The Prophet said,
"Never mind, I have taken some honey at the house of Zainab bint Jahsh,
but I shall never drink of it anymore." So there was revealed: 'O Prophet !
Why do you ban (for you) that which Allah has made lawful for you . . . If you
two (wives of Prophet) turn in repentance to Allah,' (66.1-4) addressing
Aisha and Hafsa. 'When the Prophet disclosed a matter in confidence to
some of his wives.' (66.3) namely his saying: But I have taken some honey."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 193:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle was fond of honey and sweet edible things and (it was his
habit) that after finishing the 'Asr prayer he would visit his wives and stay
with one of them at that time. Once he went to Hafsa, the daughter of
'Umar and stayed with her more than usual. I got jealous and asked the
reason for that. I was told that a lady of her folk had given her a skin filled
with honey as a present, and that she made a syrup from it and gave it to
the Prophet to drink (and that was the reason for the delay). I said, "By Allah
we will play a trick on him (to prevent him from doing so)." So I said to Sada
bint Zam'a "The Prophet will approach you, and when he comes near you,
say: 'Have you taken Maghafir (a bad-smelling gum)?' He will say, 'No.' Then
say to him: 'Then what is this bad smell which i smell from you?' He will say
to you, 'Hafsa made me drink honey syrup.' Then say: Perhaps the bees of
that honey had sucked the juice of the tree of Al-'Urfut.' I shall also say the
same. O you, Safiyya, say the same." Later Sada said, "By Allah, as soon as he
(the Prophet ) stood at the door, I was about to say to him what you had
ordered me to say because I was afraid of you." So when the Prophet came
near Sada, she said to him, "O Allah's Apostle! Have you taken Maghafir?" He
said, "No." She said. "Then what is this bad smell which I detect on you?" He
said, "Hafsa made me drink honey syrup." She said, "Perhaps its bees had
sucked the juice of Al-'Urfut tree." When he came to me, I also said the
same, and when he went to Safiyya, she also said the same. And when the
Prophet again went to Hafsa, she said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Shall I give you
more of that drink?" He said, "I am not in need of it." Sada said, "By Allah,
we deprived him (of it)." I said to her, "Keep quiet." '

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 194:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah has forgiven my followers the evil thoughts that
occur to their minds, as long as such thoughts are not put into action or
uttered." And Qatada said, "If someone divorces his wife just in his mind,
such an unuttered divorce has no effect.:

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 195:
Narrated Jabir:
A man from the tribe of Bani Aslam came to the Prophet while he was in the
mosque and said, "I have committed illegal sexual intercourse." The Prophet
turned his face to the other side. The man turned towards the side towards
which the Prophet had turned his face, and gave four witnesses against
himself. On that the Prophet called him and said, "Are you insane?" (He
added), "Are you married?" The man said, 'Yes." On that the Prophet
ordered him to be stoned to the death in the Musalla (a praying place).
When the stones hit him with their sharp edges and he fled, but he was
caught at Al-Harra and then killed

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 196:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man from Bani Aslam came to Allah's Apostle while he was in the mosque
and called (the Prophet ) saying, "O Allah's Apostle! I have committed illegal
sexual intercourse." On that the Prophet turned his face from him to the
other side, whereupon the man moved to the side towards which the
Prophet had turned his face, and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have committed
illegal sexual intercourse." The Prophet turned his face (from him) to the
other side whereupon the man moved to the side towards which the
Prophet had turned his face, and repeated his statement. The Prophet
turned his face (from him) to the other side again. The man moved again
(and repeated his statement) for the fourth time. So when the man had
given witness four times against himself, the Prophet called him and said,
"Are you insane?" He replied, "No." The Prophet then said (to his
companions), "Go and stone him to death." The man was a married one.
Jabir bin 'Abdullah Al-Ansari said: I was one of those who stoned him. We
stoned him at the Musalla ('Id praying place) in Medina. When the stones hit
him with their sharp edges, he fled, but we caught him at Al-Harra and
stoned him till he died.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 197:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The wife of Thabit bin Qais came to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle!
I do not blame Thabit for defects in his character or his religion, but I, being
a Muslim, dislike to behave in un-Islamic manner (if I remain with him)." On
that Allah's Apostle said (to her), "Will you give back the garden which your
husband has given you (as Mahr)?" She said, "Yes." Then the Prophet said to
Thabit, "O Thabit! Accept your garden, and divorce her once."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 198:
Narrated 'Ikrima:
The sister of 'Abdullah bin Ubai narrated (the above narration, 197) with the
addition that the Prophet said to Thabit's wife, "Will you return his garden?"
She said, "Yes," and returned it, and (then) the Prophet ordered Thabit to
divorce her. Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: The wife of Thabit bin Qais came to Allah's
Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I do not blame Thabit for any defects in
his character or his religion, but I cannot endure to live with him." On that
Allah's Apostle said, "Will you return his garden to him?" She said, "Yes."
Volume 7, Book 63, Number 199:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The wife of Thabit bin Qais bin Shammas came to the Prophet and said, "O
Allah's Apostle! I do not blame Thabit for any defects in his character or his
religion, but I am afraid that I (being a Muslim) may become unthankful for
Allah's Blessings." On that, Allah's Apostle said (to her), 'Will you return his
garden to him?" She said, "Yes." So she returned his garden to him and the
Prophet told him to divorce her.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 200:
Narrated 'Ikrima:
that Jamila... Then he related the whole ,Hadith, (i.e. 199).

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 201:
Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama Az-Zuhri:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Banu Al-Mughira have asked my leave to let 'Ali
marry their daughter, but I give no leave to this effect."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 202:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) Three traditions were established concerning
situations in which Barra was involved: When she was manumitted, she was
given the option to keep her husband or leave him; Allah's Apostle said,
"The wala is for the one who manumits, Once Allah's Apostle entered the
house while some meat was being cooked in a pot, but only bread and some
soup of the house were placed before, him. He said, "Don't I see the pot
containing meat?" They said, "Yes, but that meat was given to Barira i
charity (by someone), and you do not eat what it given in charity."The
Prophet said "That meat is alms for her, but for us it is a present."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 203:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
I saw him as a slave, (namely, Barira's husband).

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 204:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
That was Mughith, the slave of Bani so-and-so, i.e., Barira's husband as if I
am now looking at him following her (Barira) along the streets of Medina.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 205:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Barira's husband was a black slave called Mughith, the slave of Bani so-andso-- as if I am seeing him now, walking behind her along the streets of
Medina.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 206:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Barira's husband was a slave called Mughith, as if I am seeing him now,
going behind Barira and weeping with his tears flowing down his beard. The
Prophet said to 'Abbas, "O 'Abbas ! are you not astonished at the love of
Mughith for Barira and the hatred of Barira for Mughith?" The Prophet then
said to Barira, "Why don't you return to him?" She said, "O Allah's Apostle!
Do you order me to do so?" He said, "No, I only intercede for him." She said,
"I am not in need of him."
Volume 7, Book 63, Number 207:
Narrated Al-Aswad:
Aisha intended to buy Barira, but her masters stipulated that her wala
wound be for them. Aisha mentioned that to the Prophet who said (to
'Aisha), "Buy and manumit her, for the wala is for the one who manumits."
Once some me; was brought to the Prophet and was said, "This meat was
given in charity to Barira. " The Prophet said, "It an object of charity for
Barira and present for us."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 208:
Narrated Adam:
Shu'ba relate the same Hadith and added: Barira was given the option
regarding her husband

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 209:
Narrated Nafi':
Whenever Ibn 'Umar was asked about marrying a Christian lady or a Jewess,
he would say: "Allah has made it unlawful for the believers to marry ladies
who ascribe partners in worship to Allah, and I do not know of a greater
thing, as regards to ascribing partners in worship, etc. to Allah, than that a
lady should say that Jesus is her Lord although he is just one of Allah's
slaves."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 210:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The pagans were of two kinds as regards their relationship to the Prophet
and the Believers. Some of them were those with whom the Prophet was a
war and used to fight against, and they used to fight him; the others were
those with whom the Prophet made a treaty, and neither did the Prophet
fight them, nor did they fight him. If a lady from the first group of pagans
emigrated towards the Muslims, her hand would not be asked in marriage
unless she got the menses and then became clean. When she became clean,
it would be lawful for her to get married, and if her husband emigrated too
before she got married, then she would be returned to him. If any slave or
female slave emigrated from them to the Muslims, then they would be
considered free persons (not slaves) and they would have the same rights as
given to other emigrants. The narrator then mentioned about the pagans
involved with the Muslims in a treaty, the same as occurs in Mujahid's
narration. If a male slave or a female slave emigrated from such pagans as
had made a treaty with the Muslims, they would not be returned, but their
prices would be paid (to the pagans). Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: Qariba, the
daughter of Abi Umaiyya, was the wife of 'Umar bin Al-Khattab. 'Umar
divorced her and then Mu'awiyya bin Abi Sufyan married her. Similarly, Um
Al-Hakam, the daughter of Abi Sufyan was the wife of 'Iyad bin Ghanm AlFihri. He divorced her and then 'Abdullah bin 'Uthman Al-Thaqafi married
her.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 211:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) When believing women came to the Prophet as
emigrants, he used to test them in accordance with the order of Allah. 'O
you who believe! When believing women come to you as emigrants,
examine them . . .' (60.10) So if anyone of those believing women accepted
the above mentioned conditions, she accepted the conditions of faith. When
they agreed on those conditions and confessed that with their tongues,
Allah's Apostle would say to them, "Go, I have accepted your oath of
allegiance (for Islam). By Allah, and hand of Allah's Apostle never touched
the hand of any woman, but he only used to take their pledge of allegiance
orally. By Allah, Allah's Apostle did not take the pledge of allegiance of the
women except in accordance with what Allah had ordered him. When he
accepted their pledge of allegiance he would say to them, "I have accepted
your oath of allegiance."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 212:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle took an oath that he would abstain from his wives, and at
that time his leg had been sprained (dislocated). So he stayed in the
Mashruba (an attic room) of his for 29 days. Then he came down, and they
(the people) said, "O Allah's Apostle! You took an oath to abstain from your
wives for one month." He said, "The month is of twenty nine days."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 213:
Narrated Nafi:
Ibn 'Umar used to say about the Ila (which Allah defined (in the Holy Book),
"If the period of Ila expires, then the husband has either to retain his wife in
a handsome manner or to divorce her as Allah has ordered." Ibn 'Umar
added, "When the period of four months has expired, the husband should
be put in prison so that he should divorce his wife, but the divorce does not
occur unless the husband himself declares it. This has been mentioned by
'Uthman, 'Ali, Abu Ad-Darda, 'Aisha and twelve other companions of the
Prophet ."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 214:
Narrated Yazid:
(the Maula of Munba'ith) The Prophet was asked regarding the case of a
lost sheep. He said, "You should take it, because it is for you, or for your
brother, or for the wolf." Then he was asked about a lost camel. He got
angry and his face became red and he said (to the questioner), "You have
nothing to do with it; it has its feet and its water container with it; it can go
on drinking water and eating trees till its owner meets it." And then the
Prophet was asked about a Luqata (money found by somebody). He said,
"Remember and recognize its tying material and its container, and make
public announcement about it for one year. If somebody comes and
identifies it (then give it to him), otherwise add it to your property."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 215:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Allah's Apostle performed the Tawaf (around the Ka'ba while riding his
camel, and every time he reached the corner (of the Black Stone) he pointed
at it with his hand and said, "Allahu Akbar." (Zainab said: The Prophet said,
"An opening has been made in the wall of Gog and Magog like this and this,"
forming the number 90 (with his thumb and index finger).

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 216:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Abul Qasim (the Prophet ) said, "There is an hour (or a moment) of
particular significance on Friday. If it happens that a Muslim is offering a
prayer and invoking Allah for some good at that very moment, Allah will
grant him his request." (The sub-narrator placed the top of his finger on the
palm of the other hand between the middle finger and the little one.)

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 216h:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
During the lifetime of Allah's Apostle a Jew attacked a girl and took some
silver ornaments she was wearing and crushed her head. Her relative
brought her to the Prophet while she was in her last breaths, and she was
unable to speak. Allah's Apostle asked her, "Who has hit you? So-and so?",
mentioning somebody other than her murderer. She moved her head,
indicating denial. The Prophet mentioned another person other than the
murderer, and she again moved her head indicating denial. Then he asked,
"Was it so-and-so?", mentioning the name of her killer. She nodded,
agreeing. Then Allah's Apostle; ordered that the head of that Jew be
crushed between two stones.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 217:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Afflictions will emerge from here," pointing
towards the East.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 218:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi A'ufa:
We were with Allah's Apostle on a journey, and when the sun set, he said to
a man, "Get down and prepare a drink of Sawiq for me." The man said, "O
Allah's Apostle! Will you wait till it is evening?" Allah's Apostle again said,
"Get down and prepare a drink of Sawiq." The man said, "O Allah's Apostle!
Will you wait till it is evening, for it is still daytime. " The Prophet again said,
"Get down and prepare a drink of Sawiq." So the third time the man got
down and prepared a drink of sawiq for him. Allah's Apostle drank thereof
and pointed with his hand towards the East, saying, "When you see the
night falling from this side, then a fasting person should break his fast."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 219a:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud:
The Prophet said, "The call (or the Adhan) of Bila should not stop you from
taking the Suhur-meals for Bilal calls (or pronounces the Adhan) so that the
one who is offering the night prayer should take a rest, and he does not
indicate the daybreak or dawn." The narrator, Yazid, described (how dawn
breaks) by stretching out his hands and then separating them wide apart.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 219i:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, The example of a miser and a generous person is like
that of two persons wearing iron cloaks from the breast upto the neck
When the generous person spends, the iron cloak enlarges and spread over
his skin so much so that it covers his fingertips and obliterates his tracks. As
for the miser, as soon as he thinks of spending every ring of the iron cloak
sticks to its place (against his body) and he tries to expand it, but it does not
expand. The Prophet pointed with his hand towards his throat.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 220:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "Shall I tell you of the best families among the Ansar?"
They (the people) said, "Yes, O Allah's Apostle!" The Prophet said, "The best
are Banu- An-Najjar, and after them are Banu 'Abdil Ash-hal, and after them
are Banu Al-Harith bin Al-Khazraj, and after them are Banu Sa'ida." The
Prophet then moved his hand by closing his fingers and then opening them
like one throwing something, and then said, "Anyhow, there is good in all
the families of the Ansar. "

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 221:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi:
(a companion of Allah's Apostle) Allah's Apostle, holding out his middle and
index fingers, said, "My advent and the Hour's are like this (or like these),"
namely, the period between his era and the Hour is like the distance
between those two fingers, i.e., very short.
Volume 7, Book 63, Number 222:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet (holding out his ten fingers thrice), said, "The month is thus and
thus and thus," namely thirty days. Then (holding out his ten fingers twice
and then nine fingers), he said, "It may be thus and thus and thus," namely
twenty nine days. He meant once thirty days and once twenty nine days.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 223:
Narrated Abu Masud:
The Prophet pointed with his hand towards Yemen and said twice, "Faith is
there," and then pointed towards the East, and said, "Verily, sternness and
mercilessness are the qualities of those who are busy with their camels and
pay no attention to their religion, where the two sides of the head of Satan
will appear," namely, the tribes of Rabl'a and Muqar.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 224:
Narrated Sahl:
Allah's Apostle said, "I and the one who looks after an orphan will be like
this in Paradise," showing his middle and index fingers and separating them.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 225:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man came to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! A black child has
been born for me." The Prophet asked him, "Have you got camels?" The
man said, "Yes." The Prophet asked him, "What color are they?" The man
replied, "Red." The Prophet said, "Is there a grey one among them?' The
man replied, "Yes." The Prophet said, "Whence comes that?" He said, "Ma
be it is because of heredity." The Prophet said, "May be your latest son has
this color because of heredity."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 226:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
An Ansari man accused his wife (of committing illegal sexual intercourse).
The Prophet made both of them takes the oath of Lian, and separated them
from each other (by divorce).

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 227:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Hilal bin Umaiyya accused his wife of illegal sexual intercourse and came to
the Prophet to bear witness (against her), (taking the oath of Lian). The
Prophet was saying, "Allah knows that either of you is a liar. Will anyone of
you repent (to Allah)?" Then the lady got up and gave her witness.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 228:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi:
'Uwaimir Al-Ajlani came to 'Asim bin Ad Al-Ansari and said to him, "O 'Asim!
Suppose a man saw another man with his wife, would he kill him whereupon
you would kill him; or what should he do? Please, O 'Asim, ask about this on
my behalf." 'Asim asked Allah's Apostle about it. Allah's Apostle, disliked
that question and considered it disgraceful. What 'Asim heard from Allah's
Apostle was hard on him. When 'Asim returned to his family, 'Uwaimir came
to him and said, "O 'Asim! What did Allah's Apostle. say to you?" 'Asim said
to 'Uwaimir, "You never bring me any good. Allah's Apostle disliked the
problem which I asked him about." 'Uwaimir said, "By Allah, I will not give
up this matter until I ask the Prophet about it." So 'Uwaimir proceeded till
he came to Allah's Apostle in the midst of people, and said, "O Allah's
Apostle! If a man sees another man with his wife, would he kill him,
whereupon you would kill him, or what should he do?" Allah's Apostle said,
"Allah has revealed some decree as regards you and your wives case. Go and
bring her." So they carried out the process of Lian while I was present
among the people with Allah's Apostle. When they had finished their Lian,
'Uwaimir said, "O Allah's Apostle! If I should now keep her with me as a wife,
then I have told a lie." So he divorced her thrice before Allah's Apostle
ordered him. (Ibn Shihab said: So divorce was the tradition for all those who
were involved in a case of Lian.)

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 229:
Narrated Ibn Juraij:
Ibn Shihab informed me of Lian and the tradition related to it, referring to
the narration of Sahl bin Sad, the brother of Bani Sa'idi He said, "An Ansari
man came to Allah's Apostle and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! If a man saw
another man with his wife, should he kill him, or what should he do?' So
Allah revealed concerning his affair what is mentioned in the Holy Quran
about the affair of those involved in a case of Lian. The Prophet said, 'Allah
has given His verdict regarding you and your wife.' So they carried out Lian
in the mosque while I was present there. When they had finished, the man
said, "O Allah's Apostle! If I should now keep her with me as a wife then I
have told a lie about her. Then he divorced her thrice before Allah's Apostle
ordered him, when they had finished the Lian process. So he divorced her in
front of the Prophet ." Ibn Shihab added, "After their case, it became a
tradition that a couple involved in a case of Lian should be separated by
divorce. That lady was pregnant then, and later on her son was called by his
mother's name. The tradition concerning their inheritance was that she
would be his heir and he would inherit of her property the share Allah had
prescribed for him." Ibn Shihab said that Sahl bin Sad As'Saidi said that the
Prophet said (in the above narration), "If that lady delivers a small red child
like a lizard, then the lady has spoken the truth and the man was a liar, but if
she delivers a child with black eyes and huge lips, then her husband has
spoken the truth." Then she delivered it in the shape one would dislike (as it
proved her guilty).

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 230:
Narrated Al-Qasim bin Muhammad:
Ibn 'Abbas; said, "Once Lian was mentioned before the Prophet whereupon
'Asim bin Adi said something and went away. Then a man from his tribe
came to him, complaining that he had found a man width his wife. 'Asim
said, 'I have not been put to task except for my statement (about Lian).'
'Asim took the man to the Prophet and the man told him of the state in
which he had found his wife. The man was pale, thin, and of lank hair, while
the other man whom he claimed he had seen with his wife, was brown, fat
and had much flesh on his calves. The Prophet invoked, saying, 'O Allah!
Reveal the truth.' So that lady delivered a child resembling the man whom
her husband had mentioned he had found her with. The Prophet then made
them carry out Lian." Then a man from that gathering asked Ibn 'Abbas,
"Was she the same lady regarding which the Prophet had said, 'If I were to
stone to death someone without witness, I would have stoned this lady'?"
Ibn 'Abbas said, "No, that was another lady who, though being a Muslim,
used to arouse suspicion by her outright misbehavior. "

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 231:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
I asked Ibn 'Umar, "(What is the verdict if) a man accuses his wife of illegal
sexual intercourse?" Ibn 'Umar said, "The Prophet separated (by divorce)
the couple of Bani Al-Ajlan, and said, (to them), 'Allah knows that one of you
two is a liar; so will one of you repent?' But both of them refused. He again
said, 'Allah knows that one of you two is a liar; so will one of you repent?'
But both of them refused. So he separated them by divorce." (Aiyub, a subnarrator said: 'Amr bin Dinar said to me, "There is something else in this
Hadith which you have not mentioned. It goes thus: The man said, 'What
about my money (i.e. the Mahr that I have given to my wife)?' It was said,
'You have no right to restore any money, for if you have spoken the truth (as
regards the accusation), you have also consummated your marriage with
her; and if you have told a lie, you are less rightful to have your money back.'
")

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 232:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
I asked Ibn 'Umar about those who were involved in a case of Lien. He said,
"The Prophet said to those who were involved in a case of Lien, 'Your
accounts are with Allah. One of you two is a liar, and you (the husband) have
no right over her (she is divorced)." The man said, 'What about my property
(Mahr) ?' The Prophet said, 'You have no right to get back your property. If
you have told the truth about her then your property was for the
consummation of your marriage with her; and if you told a lie about her,
then you are less rightful to get your property back.' " Sufyan, a sub-narrator
said: I learned the Hadith from 'Amr. Narrated Aiyub: I heard Sa'id bin Jubair
saying, "I asked Ibn 'Umar, 'If a man (accuses his wife for an illegal sexual
intercourse and) carries out the process of Lian (what will happen)?' Ibn
'Umar set two of his fingers apart. (Sufyan set his index finger and middle
finger apart.) Ibn 'Umar said, 'The Prophet separated the couple of Bani AlAjlan by divorce and said thrice, "Allah knows that one of you two is a liar; so
will one of you repent (to Allah)?' "

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 233:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle separated (divorced) the wife from her husband who
accused her for an illegal sexual intercourse, and made them take the oath
of Lian .
Volume 7, Book 63, Number 234:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet made an Ansari man and his wife carry out Lian, and then
separated them by divorce.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 235:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar: The Prophet made a man and his wife carry out Lian,
and the husband repudiated her child. So the Prophet got them separated
(by divorce) and decided that the child belonged to the mother only.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 236:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Those involved in a case of Lian were mentioned before Allah's Apostle Asim
bin Adi said something about that and then left. Later on a man from his
tribe came to him and told him that he had found another man with his wife.
On that 'Asim said, "I have not been put to task except for what I have said
(about Lian)." 'Asim took the man to Allah's Apostle and he told him of the
state in which he found his wife. The man was pale, thin and lank-haired,
while the other man whom he had found with his wife was brown, fat with
thick calves and curly hair. Allah's Apostle said, "O Allah! Reveal the truth."
Then the lady delivered a child resembling the man whom her husband had
mentioned he had found with her. So Allah's Apostle ordered them to carry
out Lien. A man from that gathering said to Ibn 'Abbas, "Was she the same
lady regarding whom Allah's Apostle said, 'If I were to stone to death
someone without witnesses, I would have stoned this lady'?" Ibn 'Abbas
said, "No, that was another lady who, though being a Muslim, used to
arouse suspicion because of her outright misbehavior."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 237:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said . . . (as in 240).

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 238:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Rifa'a Al-Qurazi married a lady and then divorced her whereupon she
married another man. She came to the Prophet and said that her new
husband did not approach her, and that he was completely impotent. The
Prophet said (to her), "No (you cannot remarry your first husband) till you
taste the second husband and he tastes you (i.e. till he consummates his
marriage with you)."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 239:
Narrated Um Salama:
(the wife of the Prophet) A lady from Bani Aslam, called Subai'a, become a
widow while she was pregnant. Abu As-Sanabil bin Ba'kak demanded her
hand in marriage, but she refused to marry him and said, "By Allah, I cannot
marry him unless I have completed one of the two prescribed periods."
About ten days later (after having delivered her child), she went to the
Prophet and he said (to her), "You can marry now."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 240:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abdullah:
that his father had written to Ibn Al-Arqam a letter asking him to ask Subai'a
Al-Aslamiya how the Prophet had given her the verdict. She said, "The
Prophet, gave me his verdict that after I gave birth, I could marry."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 241
Narrated Al-Miswer bin Makhrama:
Subai'a Al-Aslamiya gave birth to a child a few days after the death of her
husband. She came to the Prophet and asked permission to remarry, and
the Prophet gave her permission, and she got married.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 242:
Narrated Qasim bin Muhammad and Sulaiman bin Yasar:
that Yahya bin Said bin Al-'As divorced the daughter of 'Abdur-Rahman bin
Al-Hakarn. Abdur-Rahman took her to his house. On that 'Aisha sent a
message to Marwan bin Al-Hakam who was the ruler of Medina, saying,
"Fear Allah, and urge your brother) to return her to her house." Marwan (in
Sulaiman's version) said, "Abdur-Rahman bin Al-Hakam did not obey me (or
had a convincing argument)." (In Al-Qasim's versions Marwan said, "Have
you not heard of the case of Fatima bint Qais?" Aisha said, "The case of
Fatima bint Qais is not in your favor.' Marwan bin Al-Hakam said to 'Aisha,
"The reason that made Fatima bint Qais go to her father's house is just
applicable to the daughter of 'Abdur-Rahman."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 243:
Narrated Al-Qasim:
Aisha said, "What is wrong with Fatima? Why doesn't she fear Allah?" by
saying that a divorced lady is not entitled to be provided with residence and
sustenance (by her husband)

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 244:
Narrated Qasim:
Ursa said to Aisha, "Do you know so-and-so, the daughter of Al-Hakam? Her
husband divorced her irrevocably and she left (her husband's house)."
'Aisha said, "What a bad thing she has done!" 'Ursa said (to 'Aisha), "Haven't
you heard the statement of Fatima?" 'Aisha replied, "It is not in her favor to
mention." 'Ursa added, 'Aisha reproached (Fatima) severely and said,
"Fatima was in a lonely place, and she was proned to danger, so the Prophet
allowed her (to go out of her husband's house)."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 245:
Narrated 'Ursa:
Aisha disapproved of what Fatima used to say.'

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 246:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When Allah's Apostle decided to leave Mecca after the Hajj, he saw Safiyya,
sad and standing at the entrance of her tent. He said to her, "Aqr (or) Halq!
You will detain us. Did you perform Tawaf-al-Ifada on the day of Nahr? She
said, "Yes." He said, "Then you can depart."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 247:
Narrated Al-Hasan:
Ma'qil gave his sister in marriage and later her husband divorced her once.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 248:
Narrated Al-Hasan:
The sister of Ma'qil bin Yasar was married to a man and then that man
divorced her and remained away from her till her period of the 'Iddah
expired. Then he demanded for her hand in marriage, but Ma'qil got angry
out of pride and haughtiness and said, "He kept away from her when he
could still retain her, and now he demands her hand again?" So Ma'qil
disagreed to remarry her to him. Then Allah revealed: 'When you have
divorced women and they have fulfilled the term of their prescribed period,
do not prevent them from marrying their (former) husbands.' (2.232) So the
Prophet sent for Ma'qil and recited to him (Allah's order) and consequently
Ma'qil gave up his pride and haughtiness and yielded to Allah's order.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 249:
Narrated Nafi:
Ibn 'Umar bin Al-Khattab divorced his wife during her menses. Allah's
Apostle ordered him to take her back till she became clean, and when she
got another period while she was with him, she should wait till she became
clean again and only then, if he wanted to divorce her, he could do so before
having sexual relations with her. And that is the period Allah has fixed for
divorcing women. Whenever 'Abdullah (bin 'Umar) was asked about that, he
would say to the questioner, "If you divorced her thrice, she is no longer
lawful for you unless she marries another man (and the other man divorces
her in his turn).' Ibn 'Umar further said, 'Would that you (people) only give
one or two divorces, because the Prophet has ordered me so."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 250:
Narrated Yunus Ibn Jubair:
Ibn 'Umar divorced his wife while she was having her menses. 'Umar asked
the Prophet who said, "Order him (your son) to take her back, and then
divorced her before her period of the 'Iddah has elapsed." I asked Ibn
'Umar, "Will that divorce (during the menses) be counted?" He replied, "If
somebody behaves foolishly (will his foolishness be an excuse for his
misbehavior)?"

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 251:
Narrated Humaid bin Nafi':
Zainab bint Abu Salama told me these three narrations: Zainab said: I went
to Um Habiba, the wife of the Prophet when her father, Abu- Sufyan bin
Herb had died. Um ,Habiba asked for a perfume which contained yellow
scent (Khaluq) or some other scent, and she first perfumed one of the girls
with it and then rubbed her cheeks with it and said, "By Allah, I am not in
need of perfume, but I have heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'It is not lawful for
a lady who believes in Allah and the Last Day to mourn for a dead person for
more than three days unless he is her husband for whom she should mourn
for four months and ten days.' " Zainab further said: I want to Zainab bint
Jahsh when her brother died. She asked for perfume and used some of it
and said, "By Allah, I am not in need of perfume, but I have heard Allah's
Apostle saying on the pulpit, 'It is not lawful for a lady who believes in Allah
and the last day to mourn for more than three days except for her husband
for whom she should mourn for four months and ten days.' " Zainab further
said, "I heard my mother, Um Salama saying that a woman came to Allah's
Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! The husband of my daughter has died
and she is suffering from an eye disease, can she apply kohl to her eye?"
Allah's Apostle replied, "No," twice or thrice. (Every time she repeated her
question) he said, "No." Then Allah's Apostle added, "It is just a matter of
four months and ten days. In the Pre-Islamic Period of ignorance a widow
among you should throw a globe of dung when one year has elapsed." I said
to Zainab, "What does 'throwing a globe of dung when one year had
elapsed' mean?" Zainab said, "When a lady was bereaved of her husband,
she would live in a wretched small room and put on the worst clothes she
had and would not touch any scent till one year had elapsed. Then she
would bring an animal, e.g. a donkey, a sheep or a bird and rub her body
against it. The animal against which she would rub her body would scarcely
survive. Only then she would come out of her room, whereupon she would
be given a globe of dung which she would throw away and then she would
use the scent she liked or the like."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 252:
Narrated Um Salama:
A woman was bereaved of her husband and her relatives worried about her
eyes (which were diseased). They came to Allah's Apostle, and asked him to
allow them to treat her eyes with kohl, but he said, "She should not apply
kohl to her eyes. (In the Pre-Islamic period of Ignorance) a widowed woman
among you would stay in the worst of her clothes (or the worst part of her
house) and when a year had elapsed, if a dog passed by her, she would
throw a globe of dung, Nay, (she cannot use kohl) till four months and ten
days have elapsed."
Narrated Um Habiba: The Prophet said, "It is not lawful for a Muslim woman
who believes in Allah and the Last Day to mourn for more than three days,
except for her husband, for whom she should mourn for four months and
ten days."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 253:
Narrated Um 'Atiyya:
We were forbidden to mourn for more than three days except for a
husband.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 254:
Narrated Um 'Atiyya:
We were forbidden to mourn for more than three days for a dead person,
except for a husband, for whom a wife should mourn for four months and
ten days (while in the mourning period) we were not allowed to put kohl in
our eyes, nor perfume our-selves, nor wear dyed clothes, except a garment
of 'Asb (special clothes made in Yemen). But it was permissible for us that
when one of us became clean from her menses and took a bath, she could
use a piece of a certain kind of incense. And it was forbidden for us to follow
funeral processions.
Volume 7, Book 63, Number 255:
Narrated Um 'Atiyya:
The Prophet said, "It is not lawful for a lady who believes in Allah and the
Last Day, to mourn for more than three days for a dead person, except for
her husband, in which case she should neither put kohl in her eyes, nor
perfume herself, nor wear dyed clothes, except a garment of 'Asb" Um
'Atiyya added: The Prophet said, "She should not use perfume except when
she becomes clean from her menses whereupon she can use Qust, and
Azfar (two kinds of incense).

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 256:
Narrated Mujahid:
(regarding the Verse): 'If any of you dies and leaves wives behind,' That was
the period of the 'Iddah which the widow was obliged to spend in the house
of the late husband. Then Allah revealed: And those of you who die and
leave wives should bequeath for their wives a year's maintenance and
residence without turning them out, but if they leave, there is no blame on
you for what they do of themselves, provided it is honorable (i.e. lawful
marriage) (2.240) Mujahid said: Allah has ordered that a widow has the right
to stay for seven months and twenty days with her husband's relatives
through her husband's will and testament so that she will complete the
period of one year (of 'Iddah). But the widow has the right to stay that extra
period or go out of her husband's house as is indicated by the statement of
Allah: 'But if they leave there is no blame on you,... ' (2.240) Ibn 'Abbas said:
The above Verse has cancelled the order of spending the period of the
'Iddah at her late husband's house, and so she could spend her period of the
'Iddah wherever she likes. And Allah says: 'Without turning them out.' 'Ata
said: If she would, she could spend her period of the 'Iddah at her husband's
house, and live there according to her (husband's) will and testament, and if
she would, she could go out (of her husband's house) as Allah says: 'There is
no blame on you for what they do of themselves.' (2.240) 'Ata added: Then
the Verses of inheritance were revealed and the order of residence (for the
widow) was cancelled, and she could spend her period of the 'Iddah
wherever she would like, and she was no longer entitled to be
accommodated by her husband's family.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 257:
Narrated Zainab bint Um Salama:
When Um Habiba bint Abi Sufyan was informed of her father's death, she
asked for perfume and rubbed it over her arms and said, "I am not in need of
perfume, but I have heard the Prophet saying, "It is not lawful for a lady who
believes in Allah and the Last Day to mourn for more than three days except
for her husband for whom the (mourning) period is four months and ten
days."

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 258:
Narrated Abu Mas'ud:
The Prophet prohibited taking the price of a dog, the earnings of a
soothsayer and the money earned by prostitution.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 259:
Narrated Abu Juhaifa:
The Prophet cursed the lady who practices tattooing and the one who gets
herself tattooed, and one who eats (takes) Riba' (usury) and the one who
gives it. And he prohibited taking the price of a dog, and the money earned
by prostitution, and cursed the makers of pictures.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 260:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet forbade taking the earnings of a slave girl by prostitution.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 261:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
I said to Ibn 'Umar, "If a man accuses his wife of illegal sexual intercourse
(what is the judgment)?" He said, "Allah's Prophet separated the couple of
Bani 'Ajlan (when the husband accused his wife for an illegal sexual
intercourse). The Prophet said, 'Allah knows that one of you two IS a liar; so
will one of you repent?' But they refused. He then again said, 'Allah knows
that one of you two is a liar; so will one of you repent?' But they refused,
whereupon he separated them by divorce." Aiyub (a sub-narrator) said:
'Amr bin Dinar said to me, "In the narration there is something which I do
not see you mentioning, i.e. the husband said, "What about my money
(Mahr)?' The Prophet said, "You are not entitled to take back money, for if
you told the truth you have already entered upon her (and consummated
your marriage with her) and if you are a liar then you are less entitled to take
it back.

Volume 7, Book 63, Number 262:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said to those who were involved in a case of Lian, "Your
accounts are with Allah. One of you two is a liar. You (husband) have right
on her (wife)." The husband said, "My money, O Allah's Apostle!" The
Prophet
said, "You are not entitled to take back any money. If you have told the
truth, the Mahr that you paid, was for having sexual relations with her
lawfully; and if you are a liar, then you are less entitled to get it back."
BOOK 64. SUPPORTING THE FAMILY (263-285)
Volume 7, Book 64, Number 263:
Narrated Abu Mas'ud Al-Ansari:
The Prophet said, "When a Muslim spends something on his family intending
to receive Allah's reward it is regarded as Sadaqa for him."

Volume 7, Book 64, Number 264:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah said, 'O son of Adam! Spend, and I shall spend on
you."

Volume 7, Book 64, Number 265:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The one who looks after a widow or a poor person is like
a Mujahid (warrior) who fights for Allah's Cause, or like him who performs
prayers all the night and fasts all the day."

Volume 7, Book 64, Number 266:
Narrated Sad:
The Prophet visited me at Mecca while I was ill. I said (to him), "I have
property; May I bequeath all my property in Allah's Cause?" He said, "No." I
said, "Half of it?" He said, "No." I said, "One third of it?" He said, "One-third
(is alright), yet it is still too much, for you'd better leave your inheritors
wealthy than leave them poor, begging of others. Whatever you spend will
be considered a Sadaqa for you, even the mouthful of food you put in the
mouth of your wife. Anyhow Allah may let you recover, so that some people
may benefit by you and others be harmed by you."

Volume 7, Book 64, Number 268:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
"The Prophet said, 'The best alms is that which is given when one is rich, and
a giving hand is better than a taking one, and you should start first to
support your dependents.' A wife says, 'You should either provide me with
food or divorce me.' A slave says, 'Give me food and enjoy my service." A
son says, "Give me food; to whom do you leave me?" The people said, "O
Abu Huraira! Did you hear that from Allah's Apostle ?" He said, "No, it is from
my own self."

Volume 7, Book 64, Number 269:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The best alms is that which you give when you are rich,
and you should start first to support your dependants."

Volume 7, Book 64, Number 270:
Narrated 'Umar:
The Prophet used to sell the dates of the garden of Bani An-Nadir and store
for his family so much food as would cover their needs for a whole year.
Volume 7, Book 64, Number 271:
Narrated Malik bin Aus bin Al-Hadathan:
Once I set out to visit 'Umar (bin Al-Khattab). (While I was sitting there with
him his gate-keeper, Yarfa, came and said, "Uthman AbdurRahman (bin
'Auf), Az-Zubair and Sad (bin Abi Waqqas) are seeking permission (to meet
you)." 'Umar said, "Yes. So he admitted them and they entered, greeted,
and sat down. After a short while Yarfa came again and said to 'Umar 'Shall I
admit 'Ali and 'Abbas?" 'Umar said, "Yes." He admitted them and when they
entered, they greeted and sat down. 'Abbas said, "O Chief of the Believers!
Judge between me and this ('Ali)." The group, 'Uthman and his companions
Sad, 'O Chief of the Believers! Judge between them and relieve one from the
other." 'Umar said. Wait! I beseech you by Allah, by Whose permission both
the Heaven and the Earth stand fast ! Do you know that Allah's Apostle said.
'We (Apostles) do not bequeath anything to our heirs, but whatever we
leave is to be given in charity.' And by that Allah's Apostles meant himself?"
The group said, "He did say so." 'Umar then turned towards 'All and 'Abbas
and said. "I beseech you both by Allah, do you know that Allah's Apostle said
that?" They said, 'Yes " 'Umar said, "Now, let me talk to you about this
matter. Allah favored His Apostle with something of this property (war
booty) which He did not give to anybody else. And Allah said:-- 'And what
Allah has bestowed on His Apostle (as Fai Booty) from them for which you
made no expedition with either cavalry or camelry . . . Allah is Able to do all
things.' (59.6) So this property was especially granted to Allah's Apostle. But
by Allah he neither withheld it from you, nor did he keep it for himself and
deprive you of it, but he gave it all to you and distributed it among you till
only this remained out of it. And out of this property Allah's Apostle used to
provide his family with their yearly needs, and whatever remained, he would
spend where Allah's Property (the revenues of Zakat) used to be spent.
Allah's Apostle kept on acting like this throughout his lifetime. Now I
beseech you by Allah, do you know that?" They said, "Yes." Then 'Umar said
to 'Ali and 'Abbas, "I beseech you by Allah, do you both know that?" They
said, "Yes." 'Umar added, "When Allah had taken His Apostle unto Him, Abu
Bakr said, 'I am the successor of Allah's Apostle. So he took charge of that
property and did with it the same what Allah's Apostle used to do, and both
of you knew all about it then." Then 'Umar turned towards 'Ali and Abbas
and said, "You both claim that Abu- Bakr was so-and-so! But Allah knows
that he was honest, sincere, pious and right (in that matter). Then Allah
caused Abu Bakr to die, and i said, 'I am the successor of Allah's Apostle and
Abu Bakr.' So I kept this property in my possession for the first two years of
my rule, and I used to do the same with it as Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr
used to do. Later both of you ('Ali and 'Abbas) came to me with the same
claim and the same problem. (O 'Abbas!) You came to me demanding your
share from (the inheritance of) the son of your brother, and he ('Ali) came
to me demanding his wives share from (the inheritance of) her father. So I
said to you, 'If you wish I will hand over this property to you, on condition
that you both promise me before Allah that you will manage it in the same
way as Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr did, and as I have done since the
beginning of my rule; otherwise you should not speak to me about it.' So
you both said, 'Hand over this property to us on this condition.' And on this
condition I handed it over to you. I beseech you by Allah, did I hand it over to
them on that condition?" The group said, "Yes." 'Umar then faced 'Ali and
'Abbas and said, "I beseech you both by Allah, did I hand it over to you both
on that condition?" They both said, "Yes." 'Umar added, "Do you want me
now to give a decision other than that? By Him with Whose permission
(order) both the Heaven and the Earth stand fast, I will never give any
decision other than that till the Hour is established! But if you are unable to
manage it (that property), then return it to me and I will be sufficient for it
on your behalf . "

Volume 7, Book 64, Number 272:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Hind bint 'Utba came and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Abu Sufyan is a miser so is
it sinful of me to feed our children from his property?" Allah's Apostle said,
"No except if you take for your needs what is just and reasonable. "

Volume 7, Book 64, Number 273:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "If the wife gives of her husband's property (something in
charity) without his permission, he will get half the reward."

Volume 7, Book 64, Number 274:
Narrated Ali:
Fatima went to the Prophet complaining about the bad effect of the stone
hand-mill on her hand. She heard that the Prophet had received a few slave
girls. But (when she came there) she did not find him, so she mentioned her
problem to 'Aisha. When the Prophet came, 'Aisha informed him about that.
'Ali added, "So the Prophet came to us when we had gone to bed. We
wanted to get up (on his arrival) but he said, 'Stay where you are." Then he
came and sat between me and her and I felt the coldness of his feet on my
abdomen. He said, "Shall I direct you to something better than what you
have requested? When you go to bed say 'Subhan Allah' thirty-three times,
'Alhamdulillah' thirty three times, and Allahu Akbar' thirty four times, for
that is better for you than a servant."

Volume 7, Book 64, Number 275:
Narrated 'Ali bin Abi Talib:
Fatima came to the Prophet asking for a servant. He said, "May I inform you
of something better than that? When you go to bed, recite "Subhan Allah'
thirty three times, 'Alhamdulillah' thirty three times, and 'Allahu Akbar'
thirty four times. 'All added, 'I have never failed to recite it ever since."
Somebody asked, "Even on the night of the battle of Siffin?" He said, "No,
even on the night of the battle of Siffin."

Volume 7, Book 64, Number 276:
Narrated Al-Aswad bin Yazid:
I asked 'Aisha "What did the Prophet use to do at home?" She said, "He used
to work for his family, and when he heard the Adhan (call for the prayer), he
would go out."

Volume 7, Book 64, Number 277:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Hind bint 'Utba said, "O Allah's Apostle! Abu Sufyan is a miser and he does
not give me what is sufficient for me and my children. Can I take of his
property without his knowledge?" The Prophet said, "Take what is sufficient
for you and your children, and the amount should be just and reasonable.

Volume 7, Book 64, Number 278:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The best women among the camel riders, are the
women of Quraish." (Another narrator said) The Prophet said, "The
righteous among the women of Quraish are those who are kind to their
young ones and who look after their husband's property . "

Volume 7, Book 64, Number 279:
Narrated 'Ali:
The Prophet gave me a silk suit and I wore it, but when I noticed anger on
his face, I cut it and distributed it among my women-folk.

Volume 7, Book 64, Number 280:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
My father died and left seven or nine girls and I married a matron. Allah's
Apostle said to me, "O Jabir! Have you married?" I said, "Yes." He said, "A
virgin or a matron?" I replied, "A matron." he said, "Why not a virgin, so that
you might play with her and she with you, and you might amuse her and she
amuse you." I said, " 'Abdullah (my father) died and left girls, and I dislike to
marry a girl like them, so I married a lady (matron) so that she may look after
them." On that he said, "May Allah bless you," or "That is good."

Volume 7, Book 64, Number 281:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man came to the Prophet and said, "I am ruined!" The Prophet said,
"Why?" He said, "I had sexual intercourse with my wife while fasting (in the
month of Ramadan)." The Prophet said to him, "Manumit a slave (as
expiation)." He replied, "I cannot afford that." The Prophet said, "Then fast
for two successive months." He said, "I cannot." The Prophet said, "Then
feed sixty poor persons." He said, "I have nothing to do that." In the
meantime a basket full of dates was brought to the Prophet . He said,
"Where is the questioner." The man said, "I am here." The Prophet said (to
him), "Give this (basket of dates) in charity (as expiation)." He said, "O
Allah's Apostle! Shall I give it to poorer people than us? By Him Who sent you
with the Truth, there is no family between Medina's two mountains poorer
than us." The Prophet smiled till his pre-molar teeth became visible. He then
said, "Then take it."

Volume 7, Book 64, Number 282:
Narrated Um Salama:
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall I get a reward (in the Hereafter) if I spend on
the children of Abu Salama and do not leave them like this and like this (i.e.,
poor) but treat them like my children?" The Prophet said, "Yes, you will be
rewarded for that which you will spend on them."

Volume 7, Book 64, Number 283:
Narrated 'Aisha :
Hind (bint 'Utba) said, "O Allah's Apostle! Abu Sufyan is a miser. Is there any
harm if I take of his property what will cover me and my children's needs?"
The Prophet said, "Take (according to your needs) in a reasonable manner."

Volume 7, Book 64, Number 284:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A dead man in debt used to be brought to Allah's Apostle who would ask,
"Has he left anything to re pay his debts?" If he was informed that he had
left something to cover his debts the Prophet would offer the funeral prayer
for him; otherwise he would say to the Muslims present there), "Offer the
funeral prayer for your friend:"but when Allah helped the Prophet to gain
victory (on his expeditions), he said, "I am closer to the Believers than
themselves, so. if one of the Believers dies in debt, I will repay it, but if he
leaves wealth, it will be for his heirs.

Volume 7, Book 64, Number 285:
Narrated Um Habiba:
(the wife of the Prophet) I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Will you marry my sister,
the daughter of Abu Sufyan." The Prophet said, "Do you like that?" I said,
"Yes, for I am not your only wife, and the person I like most to share the
good with me, is my sister." He said, "That is not lawful for me." I said, "O
Allah's Apostle! We have heard that you want to marry Durra, the daughter
of Abu Salama." He said, "You mean the daughter of Um Salama?" I said,
"Yes." He said, "Even if she were not my step-daughter, she is unlawful for
me, for she is my foster niece. Thuwaiba suckled me and Abu Salama. So you
should not present to me your daughters and sisters."
Narrated 'Ursa: Thuwaiba had been a slave girl whom Abu Lahab had
emancipated.


BOOK 65. FOOD, MEALS (286-375)
Volume 7, Book 65, Number 286:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari:
The Prophet said, "Give food to the hungry, pay a visit to the sick and
release (set free) the one in captivity (by paying his ransom)."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 287:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The family of Muhammad did not eat their fill for three successive days till
he died.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 287i:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Once while I was in a state of fatigue (because of severe hunger), I met
'Umar bin Al-Khattab, so I asked him to recite a verse from Allah's Book to
me. He entered his house and interpreted it to me. (Then I went out and)
after walking for a short distance, I fell on my face because of fatigue and
severe hunger. Suddenly I saw Allah's Apostle standing by my head. He said,
"O Abu Huraira!" I replied, "Labbaik, O Allah's Apostle, and Sadaik!" Then he
held me by the hand, and made me get up. Then he came to know what I
was suffering from. He took me to his house, and ordered a big bowl of milk
for me. I drank thereof and he said, "Drink more, O Abu Hirr!" So I drank
again, whereupon he again said, "Drink more." So I drank more till my belly
became full and looked like a bowl. Afterwards I met 'Umar and mentioned
to him what had happened to me, and said to him, "Somebody, who had
more right than you, O 'Umar, took over the case. By Allah, I asked you to
recite a Verse to me while I knew it better than you." On that Umar said to
me, "By Allah, if I admitted and entertained you, it would have been dearer
to me than having nice red camels.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 288:
Narrated 'Umar bin Abi Salama:
I was a boy under the care of Allah's Apostle and my hand used to go around
the dish while I was eating. So Allah's Apostle said to me, 'O boy! Mention
the Name of Allah and eat with your right hand, and eat of the dish what is
nearer to you." Since then I have applied those instructions when eating.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 289:
Narrated 'Umar bin Al Salama:
Who was the son of Um Salama, the wife of the Prophet:
Once I ate a meal with Allah's Apostle and I was eating from all sides of the
dish. So Allah's Apostle said to me, "Eat of the dish what is nearer to you."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 290:
Narrated Wahb bin Kaisan Abi Nu'aim:
A meal was brought to Allah's Apostle while his step-son, 'Umar bin Abi
Salama was with him. Allah's Apostle said to him, "Mention the Name of
Allah and eat of the dish what is nearer to you."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 291:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
A tailor invited Allah's Apostle to a meal which he had prepared. I went
along with Allah's Apostle and saw him seeking to eat the pieces of gourd
from the various sides of the dish. Since that day I have liked to eat gourd.
'Umar bin Abi Salama said: The Prophet, said to me, "Eat with your right
hand."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 292:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to love to start doing things from the right side whenever
possible, in performing ablution, putting on his shoes, and combing his hair.
(Al-Ash'ath said: The Prophet used to do so in all his affairs.)

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 293:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Abu Talha said to Um Sulaim, "I have heard the voice of Allah's Apostle
which was feeble, and I think that he is hungry. Have you got something (to
eat)?" She took out some loaves of barley bread, then took her facecovering sheet and wrapped the bread in part of it, and pushed it under my
garment and turned the rest of it around my body and sent me to Allah's
Apostle . I went with that, and found Allah's Apostle in the mosque with
some people. I stood up near them, and Allah's Apostle asked me, "Have
you been sent by Abu Talha?" I said, "Yes." He asked, "With some food (for
us)?" I said, "Yes." Then Allah's Apostle said to all those who were with him,
"Get up!" He set out (and all the people accompanied him) and I proceeded
ahead of them till I came to Abu Talha. Abu Talha then said, "O Um Sulaim!
Allah's Apostle has arrived along with the people, and we do not have food
enough to feed them all." She said, "Allah and His Apostle know better." So
Abu Talha went out till he met Allah's Apostle. Then Abu Talha and Allah's
Apostle came and entered the house. Allah's Apostle said, "Um Sulaim !
Bring whatever you have." She brought that very bread. The Prophet
ordered that it be crushed into small pieces, and Um Sulaim pressed a skin
of butter on it. Then Allah's Apostle said whatever Allah wished him to say
(to bless the food) and then added, "Admit ten (men)." So they were
admitted, ate their fill and went out. The Prophet then said, "Admit ten
(more)." They were admitted, ate their full, and went out. He then again
said, "Admit ten more!" They were admitted, ate their fill, and went out. He
admitted ten more, and so all those people ate their fill, and they were
eighty men.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 294:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr:
We were one hundred and thirty men sitting with the Prophet. The Prophet
said, "Have anyone of you any food with him?" It happened that one man
had one Sa of wheat flour (or so) which was turned into dough then. After a
while a tall lanky pagan came, driving some sheep. The Prophet asked, 'Will
you sell us (a sheep), or give (it to) us as a gift?" The pagan said, "No, but I
will sell it " So the Prophet bought from him a sheep which was slaughtered,
and then the Prophet ordered that the liver, the kidneys, lungs and heart,
etc., of that sheep be roasted. By Allah, none of those one hundred and
thirty men but had his share of those things. The Prophet gave to those who
were present, and also kept a share for those who were absent He then
served that cooked sheep in two big trays and we all ate together our fill;
yet there remained a part of it in those two trays which I carried on the
camel.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 295:
Narrated 'Aisha :
The Prophet died when we had satisfied our hunger with the two black
things, i.e. dates and water.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 296:
Narrated Suwaid bin An-Nu'man:
We went out with Allah's Apostle to Khaibar, and when we were at AsSahba', (Yahya, a sub-narrator said, "As-Sahba' is a place at a distance of one
day's journey to Khaibar)." Allah's Apostle asked the people to bring their
food, but there was nothing with the people except Sawiq. So we all
chewed and ate of it. Then the Prophet asked for some water and he rinsed
his mouth, and we too, rinsed our mouths. Then he led us in the Maghrib
prayer without performing ablution (again).

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 297:
Narrated Qatada:
We were in the company of Anas whose baker was with him. Anas said, The
Prophet did not eat thin bread, or a roasted sheep till he met Allah (died).

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 298:
Narrated Anas:
To the best of my knowledge, the Prophet did not take his meals in a big
tray at all, nor did he ever eat well-baked thin bread, nor did he ever eat at a
dining table.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 299:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet halted to consummate his marriage with Safiyya. I invited the
Muslims to his wedding banquet. He ordered that leather dining sheets be
spread. Then dates, dried yoghurt and butter were put on those sheets.
Anas added: The Prophet consummated his marriage with Safiyya (during a
journey) whereupon Hais (sweet dish) was served on a leather dining sheet.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 300:
Narrated Wahb bin Kaisan:
The People of Sham taunted 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair by calling him "The son
of Dhatin-Nataqain" (the woman who has two waist-belts). (His mother)
(Asma, said to him, "O my son! They taunt you with "Nataqain". Do you
know what the Nataqain were? That was my waist-belt which I divided in
two parts. I tied the water skin of Allah's Apostle with one part, and with the
other part I tied his food container."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 301:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
that his aunt, Um Hufaid bint Al-Harith bin Hazn, presented to the Prophet
butter, dried yoghurt and mastigures. The Prophet invited the people to
those mastigures and they were eaten on his dining sheet, but the Prophet
did not eat of it, as if he disliked it. Nevertheless. if it was unlawful to eat
that, the people would not have eaten it on the dining sheet of the Prophet
nor would he have ordered that they be eaten.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 302:
Narrated Suwaid bin An-Nu'man:
that while they were with the Prophet at As-Sahba' which was at a distance
of one day's journey from Khaibar the prayer became due, and the Prophet
asked the people for food but there was nothing with the people except
Sawiq. He ate of it and we ate along with him, and then he asked for water
and rinsed his mouth (with it), and then offered the (Maghrib) prayer and
we too offered the prayer but the Prophet did not perform ablution (again
after eating the Sawiq.).

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 303:
Narrated Khalid bin Al-Walid:
That he went with Allah's Apostle to the house of Maimuna, who was his
and Ibn 'Abbas' aunt. He found with her a roasted mastigure which her
sister Hufaida bint Al-Harith had brought from Najd. Maimuna presented the
mastigure before Allah's Apostle who rarely started eating any (unfamiliar)
food before it was described and named for him. (But that time) Allah's
Apostle stretched his hand towards the (meat of the) mastigure whereupon
a lady from among those who were present, said, "You should inform Allah's
Apostle of what you have presented to him. O Allah's Apostle! It is the meat
of a mastigure." (On learning that) Allah's Apostle withdrew his hand from
the meat of the mastigure. Khalid bin Al-Walid said, "O Allah's Apostle! Is this
unlawful to eat?" Allah's Apostle replied, "No, but it is not found in the land
of my people, so I do not like it." Khalid said, "Then I pulled the mastigure
(meat) towards me and ate it while Allah's Apostle was looking at me.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 304:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The food for two persons is sufficient for three, and
the food of three persons is sufficient for four persons."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 305:
Narrated Nafi':
Ibn 'Umar never used to take his meal unless a poor man was called to eat
with him. One day I brought a poor man to eat with him, the man ate too
much, whereupon Ibn 'Umar said, "O Nafi'! Don't let this man enter my
house, for I heard the Prophet saying, "A believer eats in one intestine (is
satisfied with a little food), and a kafir (unbeliever) eats in seven intestines
(eats much food)."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 306:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "A believer eats in one intestine (is satisfied with a little
food), and a kafir (unbeliever) or a hypocrite eats in seven intestines (eats
too much)."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 307:
Narrated 'Amr:
Abu Nahik was avaricious eater. Ibn 'Umar said to him, "Allah's Apostle said,
"A Kafir (unbeliever) eats in seven intestines (eats much)." On that Abu
Nahik said, "But I believe in Allah and His Apostle ."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 308:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "A Muslim eats in one intestine (i.e. he is satisfied with a
little food) while a Kafir (unbeliever) eats in seven intestines (eats much)."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 309:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man used to eat much, but when he embraced Islam, he started eating
less. That was mentioned to the Prophet who then said, "A believer eats in
one intestine (is satisfied with a little food) and a Kafir eats in seven
intestines (eats much). "

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 310:
Narrated Abu Juhaifa:
Allah's Apostle said, "I do not take my meals while leaning (against
something).
Volume 7, Book 65, Number 311:
Narrated Abu Juhaifa:
While I was with the Prophet he said to a man who was with him, "I do not
take my meals while leaning."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 312:
Narrated Khalid bin Al-Walid:
"A roasted mastigure was brought to the Prophet who stretched his hand
towards it to eat it. But it was said to him, "It is a mastigure." So he
withdrew his hand. Khalid asked, "Is it unlawful to eat?" the Prophet said,
"No, but it is not found in the land of my people and that is why I do not like
eating it." So Khalid started eating (it) while Allah's Apostle was looking at
him. An-Nadr said: 'Al-Khazira' (is prepared) from bran while 'Al-Harira' is
prepared from milk.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 313:
Narrated 'Urban bin Malik:
who attended the Badr battle and was from the Ansar, that he came to the
Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have lost my eyesight and I lead my
people in the prayer (as an Imam). When it rains, the valley which is
between me and my people, flows with water, and then I cannot go to their
mosque to lead them in the prayer. O Allah's Apostle! I wish that you could
come and pray in my house so that I may take it as a praying place. The
Prophet said, "Allah willing, I will do that." The next morning, soon after the
sun had risen, Allah's Apostle came with Abu Bakr. The Prophet asked for
the permission to enter and I admitted him. The Prophet had not sat till he
had entered the house and said to me, "Where do you like me to pray in
your house?" I pointed at a place in my house whereupon he stood and said,
"Allahu Akbar." We lined behind him and he prayed two Rakat and finished
it with Taslim. We then requested him to stay for a special meal of Khazira
which we had prepared. A large number of men from the adjoining area
gathered in the house. One of them said, "Where is Malik bin Ad-Dukhshun?"
Another man said, "He is a hypocrite and does not love Allah and His
Apostle." The Prophet said, "Do not say so. Do you not think that he has
said: "None has the right to be worshipped but Allah," seeking Allah's
pleasure? The man said, "Allah and His Apostle know better, but we have
always seen him mixing with hypocrites and giving them advice." The
Prophet said, "Allah has forbidden the (Hell) Fire for those who testify that
none has the right to be worshipped but Allah, seeking Allah's pleasure. "

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 314:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
My aunt presented (roasted) mastigures, Iqt and milk to the Prophet . The
mastigures were put on his dining sheet, and if it was unlawful to eat, it
would not have been put there. The Prophet drank the milk and ate the Iqt
only.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 315:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
We used to be happy on Fridays, for there was an old lady who used to pull
out the roots of Silq and put it in a cooking pot with some barley. When we
had finished the prayer, we would visit her and she would present that dish
before us. So we used to be happy on Fridays because of that, and we never
used to take our meals or have a mid-day nap except after the Friday prayer.
By Allah, that meal contained no fat.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 316:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet ate of the meat of a shoulder (by cutting the meat with his
teeth), and then got up and offered the prayer without performing the
ablution anew. Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: The Prophet took out a bone with meat
on it from a cooking pot and ate of it, and then offered the prayer without
performing ablution anew.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 317:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
We went out towards Mecca with the Prophet.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 318:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
Once, while I was sitting with the companions of the Prophet at a station on
the road to Mecca and Allah's Apostle was stationing ahead of us and all the
people were assuming Ihram while I was not. My companion, saw an onager
while I was busy Mending my shoes. They did not Inform me of the onager
but they wished that I would see it Suddenly I looked and saw the onager
Then I headed towards my horse, saddled it and rode, but I forgot to take
the lash and the spear. So I said to them my companions), "Give me the lash
and the spear." But they said, "No, by Allah we will not help you in any way
to hunt it ' I got angry, dismounted, took it the spear and the lash), rode (the
horse chased the onager and wounded it Then I brought it when it had dyed.
My companions started eating of its (cooked) meat, but they suspected that
it might be unlawful to eat of its meat while they were in a state of Ihram
Then I proceeded further and I kept one of its forelegs with me. When we
met Allah's Apostle we asked him about that. He said, "Have you some of its
meat with you?" I gave him that foreleg and he ate the meat till he stripped
the bone of its flesh although he was in a state of Ihram.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 319:
Narrated 'Amr bin Umaiyya
that he saw the Prophet holding a shoulder piece of mutton in his hand and
cutting part of it with a knife. Then he was called for the prayer whereupon
he put down the shoulder piece and the knife with which he was cutting it,
and then stood for prayer without performing ablution again.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 320:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet never criticized any food (he was invited to) but he used to eat
if he liked the food, and leave it if he disliked

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 321:
Narrated Abu Hazim:
that he asked Sahl, "Did you use white flour during the lifetime of the
Prophet ?" Sahl replied, "No. Hazim asked, "Did you use to sift barley flour?"
He said, "No, but we used to blow off the husk (of the barley)."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 322:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Once the Prophet distributed dates among his companions and gave each
one seven dates. He gave me seven dates too, one of which was dry and
hard, but none of the other dates was more liked by me than that one, for it
prolonged my chewing it.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 323:
Narrated Sad:
I was one of (the first) seven (who had embraced Islam) with Allah's Apostle
and we had nothing to eat then, except the leaves of the Habala or Hubula
tree, so that our stool used to be similar to that of sheep. Now the tribe of
Bani Asad wants to teach me Islam; I would be a loser and all my efforts
would be in vain (if I learn Islam anew from them).

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 324:
Narrated Abu Hazim:
I asked Sahl bin Sad, "Did Allah's Apostle ever eat white flour?" Sahl said,
"Allah's Apostle never saw white flour since Allah sent him as an Apostle till
He took him unto Him." I asked, "Did the people have (use) sieves during
the lifetime of Allah's Apostle?" Sahl said, "Allah's Apostle never saw (used)
a sieve since Allah sent him as an Apostle until He took him unto Him," I said,
"How could you eat barley unsifted?" he said, "We used to grind it and then
blow off its husk, and after the husk flew away, we used to prepare the
dough (bake) and eat it."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 325:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
that he passed by a group of people in front of whom there was a roasted
sheep. They invited him but he refused to eat and said, "Allah's Apostle left
this world without satisfying his hunger even with barley bread."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 326:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet never took his meals at a dining table, nor in small plates, and
he never ate thin well-baked bread. (The sub-narrator asked Qatada, "Over
what did they use to take their meals?" Qatada said, "On leather dining
sheets."
Volume 7, Book 65, Number 327:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The family of Muhammad had not eaten wheat bread to their satisfaction
for three consecutive days since his arrival at Medina till he died.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 328:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) that whenever one of her relatives died, the
women assembled and then dispersed (returned to their houses) except her
relatives and close friends. She would order that a pot of Talbina be cooked.
Then Tharid (a dish prepared from meat and bread) would be prepared and
the Talbina would be poured on it. 'Aisha would say (to the women),"Eat of
it, for I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'The Talbina soothes the heart of the
patient and relieves him from some of his sadness.' "

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 329:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari:
The Prophet said, "Many men reached perfection but none among the
women reached perfection except Mary, the daughter of ' Imran, and Asia,
Pharoah's wife. And the superiority of 'Aisha to other women is like the
superiority of Tharid to other kinds of food.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 330:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "The superiority of 'Aisha to other women is like the
superiority of Tharid to other kinds of food . "
Volume 7, Book 65, Number 331:
Narrated Anas:
I went along with the Prophet to the house of a young tailor of his. The
tailor presented a dish of Tharid to the Prophet and resumed his work. The
Prophet started picking the pieces of gourd and I too, started picking them
and putting it before him. Since then I have always loved (to eat) gourd.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 332:
Narrated Qatada:
We used to visit Anas bin Malik while his baker was standing (and baking).
Anas would say, "Eat! I do not know that the Prophet had ever seen wellbaked bread till he met Allah, nor had he ever seen a roasted sheep with his
own eyes."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 333:
Narrated 'Amr bin Umaiyay Ad-Damri:
I saw Allah's Apostle cutting part of the shoulder of mutton with a knife. He
ate of it and then was called for prayer whereupon he got up and put down
the knife and offered the prayer without performing new ablution.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 334:
Narrated 'Abis:
I asked 'Aisha "Did the Prophet forbid eating the meat of sacrifices offered
on 'Id-ul-Adha for more than three days" She said, "The Prophet did not do
this except in the year when the people were hungry, so he wanted the rich
to feed the poor. But later we used to store even a trotter of a sheep to eat
it fifteen days later." She was asked, "What compelled you to do so?" Sh
smiled and said, "The family of Muhammad did not eat to their satisfaction
white bread with meat soup for three successive days till he met Allah."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 335:
Narrated Jabir:
We used to carry the meat of the Hadis (sacrificed animals) to Medina
during the life-time of the Prophet .

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 336:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said to Abu Talha, "Seek one of your boys to serve me." Abu
Talha mounted me behind him (on his riding animal) and took me (to the
Prophet ). So I used to serve Allah's Apostle whenever he dismounted (to
stay somewhere). I used to hear him saying very often, "O Allah! I seek
refuge with You from, having worries sadness, helplessness, laziness,
miserliness, cowardice, from being heavily in debt and from being
overpowered by other persons unjustly." I kept on serving till we -returned
from the battle of Khaibar. The Prophet then brought Safiyya bint Huyai
whom he had won from the war booty. I saw him folding up a gown or a
garment for her to sit on behind him (on his she-camel). When he reached
As-Sahba', he prepared Hais and placed it on a dining sheet. Then he sent me
to invite men, who (came and) ate; and that was his and Safiyya's wedding
banquet. Then the Prophet proceeded, and when he saw (noticed) the
mountain of Uhud, he said, "This mountain loves us, and we love it." When
we approached Medina, he said, "O Allah! I make the area between its two
mountains a sanctuary as Abraham has made Mecca a sanctuary. O Allah!
Bless their Mudd and Sa (special kinds of measure)."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 337:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Laila:
We were sitting in the company of Hudhaifa who asked for water and a
Magian brought him water. But when he placed the cup in his hand, he
threw it at him and said, "Had I not forbidden him to do so more than once
or twice?" He wanted to say, "I would not have done so," adding, "but I
heard the Prophet saying, "Do not wear silk or Dibaja, and do not drink in
silver or golden vessels, and do not eat in plates of such metals, for such
things are for the unbelievers in this worldly life and for us in the Hereafter."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 338:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari:
Allah's Apostle said, "The example of a Believer who recites the Quran, is
that of a citron which smells good and tastes good; And the example of a
Believer who does not recite the Quran, is that of a date which has no smell
but tastes sweet; and the example of a hypocrite who recites the Quran, is
that of an aromatic plant which smells good but tastes bitter; and the
example of a hypocrite who does not recite the Quran, is that of a colocynth
plant which has no smell and is bitter in taste."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 339:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "The superiority of 'Aisha to other ladies is like the
superiority of Tharid to other kinds of food."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 340:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Traveling is a kind of torture, as it prevents one from
sleeping and eating! So when one has finished his job, he should return
quickly to his family."
Volume 7, Book 65, Number 341:
Narrated Qasim bin Muhammad:
Three traditions have been established because of Barira: 'Aisha intended to
buy her and set her free, but Barira's masters said, "Her wala' will be for us."
'Aisha mentioned that to Allah's Apostle who said, "You could accept their
condition if you wished, for the wala is for the one who manumits the
slave." Barira was manumitted, then she was given the choice either to stay
with her husband or leave him; One day Allah's Apostle entered 'Aisha's
house while there was a cooking pot of food boiling on the fire. The Prophet
asked for lunch, and he was presented with bread and some extra food
from the home-made Udm (e.g. soup). He asked, "Don't I see meat (being
cooked)?" They said, "Yes, O Allah's Apostle! But it is the meat that has been
given to Barira in charity and she has given it to us as a present." He said,
"For Barira it is alms, but for us it is a present."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 342:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle used to love sweet edible things and honey.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 343:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I used to accompany Allah's Apostle to fill my stomach; and that was when I
did not eat baked bread, nor wear silk. Neither a male nor a female slave
used to serve me, and I used to bind stones over my belly and ask somebody
to recite a Quranic Verse for me though I knew it, so that he might take me
to his house and feed me. Ja'far bin Abi Talib was very kind to the poor, and
he used to take us and feed us with what ever was available in his house,
(and if nothing was available), he used to give us the empty (honey or
butter) skin which we would tear and lick whatever was in it.
Volume 7, Book 65, Number 344:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle went to (the house of) his slave tailor, and he was offered (a
dish of) gourd of which he started eating. I have loved to eat gourd since I
saw Allah's Apostle eating it.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 345:
Narrated Abu Mas'ud Al-Ansari:
There was a man called Abu Shu'aib, and he had a slave who was a butcher.
He said (to his slave), "Prepare a meal to which I may invite Allah's Apostle
along with four other men." So he invited Allah's Apostle and four other
men, but another man followed them whereupon the Prophet said, "You
have invited me as one of five guests, but now another man has followed us.
If you wish you can admit him, and if you wish you can refuse him." On that
the host said, "But I admit him." Narrated Muhammad bin Isma'il: If guests
are sitting at a dining table, they do not have the right to carry food from
other tables to theirs, but they can pass on food from their own table to
each other; otherwise they should leave it.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 346:
Narrated Anas:
I was a young boy when I once was walking with Allah's Apostle . Allah's
Apostle entered the house of his slave tailor and the latter brought a dish
filled with food covered with pieces of gourd. Allah's Apostle started picking
and eating the gourd. When I saw that, I started collecting and placing the
gourd before him. Then the slave returned to his work. Anas added: I have
kept on loving gourd since I saw Allah's Apostle doing what he was doing.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 347:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
A tailor invited the Prophet to a meal which he had prepared, and I went
along with the Prophet . The tailor presented barley bread and soup
containing gourd and cured meat. I saw the Prophet picking the pieces of
gourd from around the dish, and since then I have kept on liking gourd.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 348:
Narrated Anas:
I saw the Prophet being served with soup and containing gourd and cured
meat, and I saw him picking and eating the pieces of gourd.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 349:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet did not do that (i.e., forbade the storage of the meat of
sacrifices for three days) except (he did so) so that the rich would feed the
poor. But later we used to keep even trotters to cook, fifteen days later. The
family of Muhammad did not eat wheat bread with meat or soup to their
satisfaction for three successive days.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 350:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
A tailor invited Allah's Apostle to a meal which he had prepared. I went with
Allah's Apostle to that meal, and the tailor served the Prophet with barley
bread and soup of gourd and cured meat. I saw Allah's Apostle picking the
pieces of gourd from around the dish, and since then I have kept on liking
gourd.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 351
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Ja'far bin Abi Talib:
I saw Allah's Apostle eating fresh dates with snake cucumber.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 352:
Narrated Abu 'Uthman:
I was a guest of Abu Huraira for seven days. Abu Huraira, his wife and his
slave used to get up and remain awake for one-third of the night by turns.
Each would offer the night prayer and then awaken the other. I heard Abu
Huraira saying, "Allah's Apostle distributed dates among his companions
and my share was seven dates, one of which was a Hashafa (a date which
dried on the tree before it was fully ripe).

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 353:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet distributed dates among us, and my share was five dates, four
of which were good, and one was a ,Hashafa, and I found the Hashafa the
hardest for my teeth.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 354:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
There was a Jew in Medina who used to lend me money up to the season of
plucking dates. (Jabir had a piece of land which was on the way to Ruma).
That year the land was not promising, so the payment of the debt was
delayed one year. The Jew came to me at the time of plucking, but gathered
nothing from my land. I asked him to give me one year respite, but he
refused. This news reached the Prophet whereupon he said to his
companions, "Let us go and ask the Jew for respite for Jabir." All of them
came to me in my garden, and the Prophet started speaking to the Jew, but
he Jew said, "O Abu Qasim! I will not grant him respite." When the Prophet
saw the Jew's attitude, he stood up and walked all around the garden and
came again and talked to the Jew, but the Jew refused his request. I got up
and brought some ripe fresh dates and put it in front of the Prophet. He ate
and then said to me, "Where is your hut, O Jabir?" I informed him, and he
said, "Spread out a bed for me in it." I spread out a bed, and he entered and
slept. When he woke up, I brought some dates to him again and he ate of it
and then got up and talked to the Jew again, but the Jew again refused his
request. Then the Prophet got up for the second time amidst the palm trees
loaded with fresh dates, and said, "O Jabir! Pluck dates to repay your debt."
The Jew remained with me while I was plucking the dates, till I paid him all
his right, yet there remained extra quantity of dates. So I went out and
proceeded till I reached the Prophet and informed him of the good news,
whereupon he said, "I testify that I am Allah's Apostle."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 355:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:
While we were sitting with the Prophet a spadix of palm tree was brought to
him. The Prophet said, "There is a tree among the trees which is as blessed
as a Muslim" I thought that it was the date palm tree and intended to say,
"It is the date-palm tree, O Allah's Apostle!" but I looked behind to see that I
was the tenth and youngest of ten men present there, so I kept quiet' Then
the Prophet said, "It is the datepalm tree."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 356:
Narrated Sad:
Allah's Apostle said, "He who eats seven 'Ajwa dates every morning, will not
be affected by poison or magic on the day he eats them."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 357:
Narrated Jabala bin Suhaim.
At the time of Ibn Az-Zubair, we were struck with famine, and he provided
us with dates for our food. 'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to pass by us while we
were eating, and say, "Do not eat two dates together at a time, for the
Prophet forbade the taking of two dates together at a time (in a
gathering)." Ibn 'Umar used to add, "Unless one takes the permission of
one's companions."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 358:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Ja'far:
I saw the Prophet eating fresh dates with snake cucumbers.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 359:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "There is a tree among the trees which is similar to a
Muslim (in goodness), and that is the date palm tree."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 360:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Ja'far:
I saw Allah's Apostle eating fresh dates with snake cucumbers.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 361:
Narrated Anas:
My mother, Um Sulaim, took a Mudd of barley grain, ground it and made
porridge from it, and pressed (over it), a butter skin she had with her. Then
she sent me to the Prophet, and I reached him while he was sitting with his
companions. I invited him, whereupon he said, "And those who are with
me?' I returned and said, "He says, 'And those who are with me?" Abu Talha
went out to him and said, "O Allah's Apostle! It is just a meal prepared by
Um Sulaim." The Prophet entered and the food was brought to him. He said,
"Let ten persons enter upon me." Those ten entered and ate their fill. Again
he said, 'Let ten (more) enter upon me." Those ten entered and ate their fill.
Then he said, "Let ten (more) enter upon me." He called forty persons in all
Then Allah's Apostle ate and got up. I started looking (at the food) to see if
it decreased or not.

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 362:
Narrated 'Abdul 'Aziz:
It was said to Anas "What did you hear the Prophet saying about garlic?"
Anas replied, "Whoever has eaten (garlic) should not approach our
mosque."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 363:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "Whoever has eaten garlic or onion should keep away
from us (or should keep away from our mosque).'

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 364:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
We were with Allah's Apostle collecting Al-Kabath at Mar-Az-Zahran. The
Prophet said, "Collect the black ones, for they are better." Somebody said,
(O Allah's Apostle!) Have you ever shepherded sheep?" He said, "There has
been no prophet but has shepherded them. "

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 365:
Narrated Suwaid bin An Nu'man
We went out with Allah's Apostle to Khaibar, and when we reached AsSahba', the Prophet asked for food, and he was offered nothing but Sawiq.
We ate, and then Allah's Apostle stood up for the prayer. He rinsed his
mouth with water, and we too, rinsed our mouths. Narrated Suwaid; We
went out with Allah's Apostle to Khaibar. and when we reached As-Sahba',
which (Yahya says) is one day' journey from Khaibar, the Prophet asked for
food, and he was offered nothing but Sawiq which we chewed and ate.
Then the Prophet asked for water and rinsed his mouth, and we too, rinsed
our mouths along with him. He then led us in the Maghrib prayer without
performing ablution again

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 366:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, 'When you eat, do not wipe your hands till you have licked
it, or had it licked by somebody else."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 367:
Narrated Said bin Al-Harith:
that he asked Jabir bin 'Abdullah about performing ablution after taking a
cooked meal. He replied, "It is not essential," and added, "We never used to
get such kind of food during the lifetime of the Prophet except rarely; and if
at all we got such a dish, we did not have any handkerchiefs to wipe our
hands with except the palms of our hands, our forearms and our feet. We
would perform the prayer thereafter with-out performing new ablution."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 368:
Narrated Abu Umama:
Whenever the dining sheet of the Prophet was taken away (i.e., whenever
he finished his meal), he used to say: "Al-hamdu lillah kathiran taiyiban
mubarakan fihi ghaira makfiy wala muwada' wala mustaghna'anhu
Rabbuna."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 369:
Narrated Abu Umama:
Whenever the Prophet finished his meals (or when his dining sheet was
taken away), he used to say. "Praise be to Allah Who has satisfied our needs
and quenched our thirst. Your favor cannot by compensated or denied."
Once he said, upraise be to You, O our Lord! Your favor cannot be
compensated, nor can be left, nor can be dispensed with, O our Lord!"

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 370:
Narrated .Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "When your servant brings your food to you, if you do not
ask him to join you, then at least ask him to take one or two handfuls, for he
has suffered from its heat (while cooking it) and has taken pains to cook it
nicely."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 371:
Narrated Abu Mas'ud Al-Ansari:
There was an Ansari man nicknamed, Abu Shu'aib, who had a slave who was
a butcher. He came to the Prophet while he was sitting with his companions
and noticed the signs of hunger on the face of the Prophet . So he went to
his butcher slave and said, "Prepare for me a meal sufficient for five persons
so that I may invite the Prophet along with four other men." He had the
meal prepared for him and invited him. A (sixth) man followed them. The
Prophet said, "O Abu Shu'aib! Another man has followed us. If you wish, you
may invite him; and if you wish, you may refuse him." Abu Shu'aib said, "No,
I will admit him."
Volume 7, Book 65, Number 372:
Narrated 'Amr bin Umaiyya:
that he saw Allah's Apostle cutting a piece of mutton from its shoulder part
he was carrying in his hand. When he was called for prayer, he put it down
and the knife with which he was cutting it. Then he stood up and offered the
prayer without performing new ablution

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 373r:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, If supper is served and the Iqama for (Isha) prayer is
proclaimed, start with you supper first."

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 373i:
Narrated Nafi:
Once Ibn Umar was taking his supper while he was listening to the recitation
of (Quran by) the Imam (in the Isha prayer).

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 374:
Narrated Aisha:
The Prophet said, "If the Iqama for ('Isha') prayer is proclaimed and supper
is served, take your supper first "

Volume 7, Book 65, Number 375:
Narrated Anas:
I know (about) the Hijab (the order of veiling of women) more than anybody
else. Ubai bin Ka'b used to ask me about it. Allah's Apostle became the
bridegroom of Zainab bint Jahsh whom he married at Medina. After the sun
had risen high in the sky, the Prophet invited the people to a meal. Allah's
Apostle remained sitting and some people remained sitting with him after
the other guests had left. Then Allah's Apostle got up and went away, and I
too, followed him till he reached the door of 'Aisha's room. Then he thought
that the people must have left the place by then, so he returned and I also
returned with him. Behold, the people were still sitting at their places. So he
went back again for the second time, and I went along with him too. When
we reached the door of 'Aisha's room, he returned and I also returned with
him to see that the people had left. Thereupon the Prophet hung a curtain
between me and him and the Verse regarding the order for (veiling of
women) Hijab was revealed.
BOOK 66. SACRIFICE ON OCCASION OF BIRTH (`AQIQA) (376-383)
Volume 7, Book 66, Number 376:
Narrated Abu Musa:
A son was born to me and I took him to the Prophet who named him
Ibrahim, did Tahnik for him with a date, invoked Allah to bless him and
returned him to me. (The narrator added: That was Abu Musa's eldest son.)

Volume 7, Book 66, Number 377:
Narrated 'Aisha:
A boy was brought to the Prophet to do Tahnik for him, but the boy
urinated on him, whereupon the Prophet had water poured on the place of
urine.

Volume 7, Book 66, Number 378:
Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr:
I conceived 'Abdullah bin AzZubair at Mecca and went out (of Mecca) while I
was about to give birth. I came to Medina and encamped at Quba', and gave
birth at Quba'. Then I brought the child to Allah's Apostle and placed it (on
his lap). He asked for a date, chewed it, and put his saliva in the mouth of
the child. So the first thing to enter its stomach was the saliva of Allah's
Apostle. Then he did its Tahnik with a date, and invoked Allah to bless him. It
was the first child born in the Islamic era, therefore they (Muslims) were
very happy with its birth, for it had been said to them that the Jews had
bewitched them, and so they would not produce any offspring.

Volume 7, Book 66, Number 379p:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Abu Talha had a child who was sick. Once, while Abu Talha was out, the child
died. When Abu Talha returned home, he asked, "How does my son fare?"
Um Salaim (his wife) replied, "He is quieter than he has ever been." Then she
brought supper for him and he took his supper and slept with her. When he
had finished, she said (to him), "Bury the child (as he's dead)." Next morning
Abu Talha came to Allah's Apostle and told him about that. The Prophet said
(to him), "Did you sleep with your wife last night?" Abu Talha said, "Yes".
The Prophet said, "O Allah! Bestow your blessing on them as regards that
night of theirs." Um Sulaim gave birth to a boy. Abu Talha told me to take
care of the child till it was taken to the Prophet. Then Abu Talha took the
child to the Prophet and Um Sulaim sent some dates along with the child.
The Prophet took the child (on his lap) and asked if there was something
with him. The people replied, "Yes, a few dates." The Prophet took a date,
chewed it, took some of it out of his mouth, put it into the child's mouth and
did Tahnik for him with that, and named him 'Abdullah.

Volume 7, Book 66, Number 379i:
Narrated Anas:
As above.

Volume 7, Book 66, Number 380:
Narrated Salman bin 'Amir Ad-Dabbi:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "'Aqiqa is to be offered for a (newly born)
boy, so slaughter (an animal) for him, and relieve him of his suffering."
(Note: It has been quoted in Fateh-AL-Bari that the majority of the Religious
Scholars agrees to the Hadith narrated in Sahih At-TlRMlZY that the Prophet
was asked about Aqiqa and he ordered 2 sheep for a boy and one sheep for
a girl and that is his tradition "SUNNA".)

Volume 7, Book 66, Number 381:
Narrated Habib bin Ash-Shahid:
Ibn Sirin told me to ask Al-Hassan from whom he had heard the narration of
'Aqiqa. I asked him and he said, "From Samura bin Jundab."

Volume 7, Book 66, Number 382:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Neither Fara' nor 'Atira (is permissible):" Al-Fara' nor
'Atira (is permissible):" Al-Fara' was the first offspring (of camels or sheep)
which the pagans used to offer (as a sacrifice) to their idols. And Al-'Atira
was (a sheep which was to be slaughtered) during the month of Rajab.

Volume 7, Book 66, Number 383:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Neither Fara' nor 'Atira) is permissible)." Al-Fara' was the
first offspring (they got of camels or sheep) which they (pagans) used to
offer (as a sacrifice) to their idols. 'Atira was (a sheep which used to be
slaughtered) during the month of Rajab.
BOOK 67. HUNTING, SLAUGHTERING (384-452)
Volume 7, Book 67, Number 384:
Narrated Adi bin Hatim:
I asked the Prophet about the game killed by a Mi'rad (i.e. a sharp-edged
piece of wood or a piece of wood provided with a sharp piece of iron used
for hunting). He said, "If the game is killed with its sharp edge, eat of it, but
if it is killed with its shaft, with a hit by its broad side then the game is
(unlawful to eat) for it has been beaten to death." I asked him about the
game killed by a trained hound. He said, "If the hound catches the game for
you, eat of it, for killing the game by the hound, is like its slaughtering. But if
you see with your hound or hounds another dog, and you are afraid that it
might have shared in hunting the game with your hound and killed it, then
you should not eat of it, because you have mentioned Allah's name on
(sending) your hound only, but you have not mentioned it on some other
hound

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 385:
Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim:
I asked Allah's Apostle about the Mi'rad. He said, "If you hit the game with
its sharp edge, eat it, but if the Mi'rad hits the game with its shaft with a hit
by its broad side do not eat it, for it has been beaten to death with a piece of
wood. (i.e. unlawful)." I asked, "If I let loose my trained hound after a
game?" He said, "If you let loose your trained hound after game, and
mention the name of Allah, then you can eat." I said, "If the hound eats of
the game?" He said "Then you should not eat of it, for the hound has hunted
the game for itself and not for you." I said, "Some times I send my hound
and then I find some other hound with it?" He said "Don't eat the game, as
you have mentioned the Name of Allah on your dog only and not on the
other."
Volume 7, Book 67, Number 386:
Narrated Adi bin Hatim:
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! We let loose our trained hounds after a game?" He
said, "Eat what they hunt for you." I said, "Even if they killed (the game)?"
He replied, 'Even if they killed (the game)." I said, 'We also hit (the game)
with the Mi'rad?" He said, "Eat of the animal which the Mi'rad kills by
piercing its body, but do not eat of the animal which is killed by the broad
side of the Mi'rad.''

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 387:
Narrated Abu Tha'laba Al-Khushani:
I said, "O Allah's Prophet! We are living in a land ruled by the people of the
Scripture; Can we take our meals in their utensils? In that land there is plenty
of game and I hunt the game with my bow and with my hound that is not
trained and with my trained hound. Then what is lawful for me to eat?" He
said, "As for what you have mentioned about the people of the Scripture, if
you can get utensils other than theirs, do not eat out of theirs, but if you
cannot get other than theirs, wash their utensils and eat out of it. If you
hunt an animal with your bow after mentioning Allah's Name, eat of it. and if
you hunt something with your trained hound after mentioning Allah's Name,
eat of it, and if you hunt something with your untrained hound (and get it
before it dies) and slaughter it, eat of it."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 388:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Maghaffal:
that he saw a man throwing stones with two fingers (at something) and said
to him, "Do not throw stones, for Allah's Apostle has forbidden throwing
stones, or e used to dislike it." 'Abdullah added: Throwing stones will neither
hunt the game, nor kill (or hurt) an enemy, but it may break a tooth or
gouge out an eye." Afterwards 'Abdullah once again saw the man throwing
stones. He said to him, "I tell you that Allah's Apostle has forbidden or
disliked the throwing the stones (in such a way), yet you are throwing
stones! I shall not talk to you for such-and-such a period."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 389:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "Whoever keeps a (pet) dog which is neither a watch dog
nor a hunting dog, will get a daily deduction of two Qirat from his good
deeds."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 390:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:
I heard the Prophet saying, "If someone keeps a dog neither for hunting, nor
for guarding livestock, the reward (for his good deeds) will be reduced by
two Qirats per day."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 391:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "If someone keeps a dog neither for guarding livestock,
nor for hunting, his good deeds will decrease (in reward) by two Qirats a
day.'

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 392:
Narrated Adi bin Hatim:
I asked Allah's Apostle. "We hunt with the help of these hounds." He said,
"If you let loose your trained hounds after a game, and mention the name of
Allah, then you can eat what the hounds catch for you, even if they killed the
game. But you should not eat of it if the hound has eaten of it, for then it is
likely that the hound has caught the game for itself. And if other hounds join
your hound in hunting the game, then do not eat of it."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 393:
Narrated Adi bin Hatim:
The Prophet said, "If you let loose your hound after a game and mention
Allah's Name on sending it, and the hound catches the game and kills it,
then you can eat of it. But if the hound eats of it, then you should not eat
thereof, for the hound has caught it for itself. And if along with your hound,
join other hounds, and Allah's Name was not mentioned at the time of their
sending, and they catch an animal and kill it, you should not ea: of it, for you
will not know which of them has killed it. And if you have thrown an arrow
at the game and then find it (dead) two or three days later and, it bears no
mark other than the wound inflicted by your arrow, then you can eat of it.
But if the game is found (dead) in water, then do not eat of it." And it has
also been narrated by 'Adi bin Hatim that he asked the Prophet "If a hunter
throws an arrow at the game and after tracing it for two or three days he
finds it dead but still bearing his arrow, (can he eat of it)?" The Prophet
replied, "He can eat if he wishes."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 394:
Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim:
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I let loose my hound after a game and mention
Allah's Name on sending it." The Prophet said, "If you let loose your hound
after a game and you mention Allah's Name on sending it and the hound
catches and kills the game and eats of it, then you should not eat of it, for it
has killed it for itself." I said, "Sometimes when I send my hound after a
game, I find another hound along with it and I do not know which of them
has caught the game." He said, "You must not eat of it because you have
not mentioned, the Name of Allah except on sending your own hound, and
you did not mention it on the other hound." Then I asked him about the
game hunted with a Mi'rad (i.e. a sharp edged piece of wood or a piece of
wood provided with a sharp piece of iron used for hunting). He said, "If the
game is killed with its sharp edge, you can eat of it, but if it is killed by its
broad side (shaft), you cannot eat of it, for then it is like an animal beaten to
death with a pie

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 395:
Narrated Adi Bin Hatim:
I asked Allah's Apostle, "We hunt with these hounds." He said, "If you send
your trained hounds after a game and mention Allah's Name on sending,
you can eat of what they catch for you. But if the hound eats of the game,
then you must not eat of it, for I am afraid that the hound caught it for itself,
and if another hound joins your hounds (during the hunt), you should not
eat of the game."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 396:
Narrated Abu Tha'laba Al-Khushani:
I came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! We are living in the
land of the people of the Scripture and we take our meals in their utensils,
and in the land there is game and I hunt with my bow and trained or
untrained hounds; please tell me what is lawful for us of that." He said, "As
for your saying that you are living in the land of the people of the Scripture
and that you eat in their utensils, if you can get utensils other than theirs, do
not eat in their utensils, but if you do not find (other than theirs), then wash
their utensils and eat in them. As for your saying that you are in the land of
game, if you hung something with your bow, and have mentioned Allah's
Name while hunting, then you can eat (the game). And if you hunt
something with your trained hound, and have mentioned Allah's Name on
sending it for hunting then you can eat (the game). But if you hunt
something with your untrained hound and you were able to slaughter it
before its death, you can eat of it."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 397:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
We provoked a rabbit at Marr Az-Zahran till it started jumping. My
companions chased it till they got tired. But I alone ran after it and caught it
and brought it to Abu Talha. He sent both its legs to the Prophet who
accepted them.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 398:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
that once he was with Allah's Apostle (on the way to Mecca). When he had
covered some of the way to Mecca, he and some companions of his, who
were in the state of lhram. remained behind the Prophet while Abu Qatada
himself was not in the state of Ihram. Abu Qatada, seeing an onager rode his
horse and asked his companions to hand him a whip, but they refused. He
then asked them to hand him his spear, but they refused. Then he took it
himself and attacked the onager and killed it. Some of the Companions of
Allah's Apostle ate of it, but some others refused to eat. When they met
Allah's Apostle they asked him about that. He said, "It was meal given to you
by Allah."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 399:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
(the same Hadith above, but he added); The Prophet asked, "Is there any of
its meat left with you?"
Volume 7, Book 67, Number 400:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
I was with the Prophet (on a journey) between Mecca and Medina, and all of
them, (i.e. the Prophet and his companions) were in the state of Ihram,
while I was not in that state. I was riding my horse and I used to be fond of
ascending mountains. So while I was doing so I noticed that the people were
looking at something. I went to see what it was, and behold it was an
onager. I asked my companions, "What is that?" They said, "We do not
know." I said, "It is an onager.' They said, "It is what you have seen." I had
left my whip, so I said to them, "Hand to me my whip." They said, "We will
not help you in that (in hunting the onager)." I got down, took my whip and
chased the animal (on my horse) and did not stop till I killed it. I went to
them and said, "Come on, carry it!" But they said, "We will not even touch
it." At last I alone carried it and brought it to them. Some of them ate of it
and some refused to eat of it. I said (to them), "I will ask the Prophet about
it (on your behalf)." When I met the Prophet, I told him the whole story. He
said to me, "Has anything of it been left with you?" I said, "Yes." He said,
"Eat, for it is a meal Allah has offered to you."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 401:
Narrated Jabir:
We went out in a campaign and the army was called The Army of the Khabt,
and Abu 'Ubaida was our commander. We were struck with severe hunger.
Then the sea threw a huge dead fish called Al-'Anbar, the like of which had
never been seen. We ate of it for half a month, and then Abu 'Ubaida took
one of its bones (and made an arch of it) so that a rider could easily pass
under it.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 402:
Narrated Jabir:
The Prophet sent us as an army unit of three hundred warriors under the
command of Abu 'Ubaida to ambush a caravan of the Quraish. But we were
struck with such severe hunger that we ate the Khabt (desert bushes), so
our army was called the Army of the Khabt. Then the sea threw a huge fish
called Al-'Anbar and we ate of it for half a month and rubbed our bodies
with its fat till our bodies became healthy. Then Abu Ubaida took one of its
ribs and fixed it over the ground and a rider passed underneath it. There was
a man amongst us who slaughtered three camels when hunger became
severe, and he slaughtered three more, but after that Abu 'Ubaida forbade
him to do so.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 403:
Narrated Ibn Abi Aufa:
We participated with the Prophet in six or seven Ghazawat, and we used to
eat locusts with him.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 404:
Narrated Abu Tha'laba Al-Khushani:
I came to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! We are living in the land
of the people of the Scripture, and we take our meals in their utensils, and
there is game in that land and I hunt with my bow and with my trained
hound and with my untrained hound." The Prophet said, "As for your saying
that you are in the land of people of the Scripture, you should not eat in
their utensils unless you find no alternative, in which case you must wash
the utensils and then eat in them As for your saying that you are in the land
of game, if you hunt something with your bow, mention Allah's Name (while
hunting the game) and eat; and if you hunt something with your trained
hound, mention Allah's Name on sending and eat; and if you hunt something
with your untrained hound and get it alive, slaughter it and you can eat of it"
Volume 7, Book 67, Number 405:
Narrated Salama bin Al-Aqwa':
In the evening of the day of the conquest of Khaibar, the army made fires
(for cooking). The Prophet said, "For what have you made these fires?" They
said, "For cooking the meat of domestic donkeys." He said, "Throw away
what is in the cooking pots and break the pots." A man from the people got
up and said, "Shall we throw the contents of the cooking pots and then
wash the pots (instead of breaking them)?" The Prophet said, "Yes, you can
do either'

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 406:
Narrated Rafi bin Khadij:
We were with the Prophet in Dhul-Hulaifa and there the people were struck
with severe hunger. Then we got camels and sheep as war booty (and
slaughtered them). The Prophet was behind all the people. The people
hurried and fixed the cooking pots (for cooking) but the Prophet came there
and ordered that the cooking pots be turned upside down. Then he
distributed the animals, regarding ten sheep as equal to one camel. One of
the camels ran away and there were a few horses with the people. They
chased the camel but they got tired, whereupon a man shot it with an arrow
whereby Allah stopped it. The Prophet said, "Among these animals some are
as wild as wild beasts, so if one of them runs away from you, treat it in this
way." I said. "We hope, or we are afraid that tomorrow we will meet the
enemy and we have no knives, shall we slaughter (our animals) with canes?"
The Prophet said, "If the killing tool causes blood to gush out and if Allah's
Name is mentioned, eat (of the slaughterer animal). But do not slaughter
with a tooth or a nail. I am telling you why: A tooth is a bone, and the nail is
the knife of Ethiopians."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 407:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said that he met Zaid bin 'Amr Nufail at a place near Baldah
and this had happened before Allah's Apostle received the Divine
Inspiration. Allah's Apostle presented a dish of meat (that had been offered
to him by the pagans) to Zaid bin 'Amr, but Zaid refused to eat of it and then
said (to the pagans), "I do not eat of what you slaughter on your stonealtars
(Ansabs) nor do I eat except that on which Allah's Name has been
mentioned on slaughtering."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 408:
Narrated Jundub bin Sufyan Al-Bajali:
Once during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle we offered some animals as
sacrifices. Some people slaughtered their sacrifices before the (Id) prayer,
so when the Prophet finished his prayer, he saw that they had slaughtered
their sacrifices before the prayer. He said, "Whoever has slaughtered (his
sacrifice) before the prayer, should slaughter (another sacrifice) in lieu of it;
and whoever has not yet slaughtered it till we have prayed; should slaughter
(it) by mentioning Allah's Name."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 409:
Narrated Ka'b:
that a slave girl of theirs used to shepherd some sheep at Si'a (a mountain
near Medina). On seeing one of her sheep dying, she broke a stone and
slaughtered it. Ka'b said to his family, "Do not eat (of it) till I go to the
Prophet and ask him, or, till I send someone to ask him." So he went to the
Prophet or sent someone to him The Prophet permitted (them) to eat it.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 410:
Narrated 'Abdullah
that Ka'b had a slave girl who used to graze his sheep on a small mountain,
called "Sl'a", situated near the market. Once a sheep was dying, so she
broke a stone and slaughtered it with it. When they mentioned that to the
Prophet, he, permitted them to eat it.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 411:
Narrated Rafi bin Khadij:
that he said, "O Allah's Apostle! We have no knife." The Prophet said, "if the
killing tool causes blood to gush out, and if Allah's Name is mentioned, eat
(of the slaughtered animal). But do not slaughter with a nail or a tooth, for
the nail is the knife of Ethiopians and a tooth is a bone." Suddenly a camel
ran away and it was stopped (with an arrow). The Prophet then said, "Of
these camels there are some which are as wild as wild beasts; so if one of
them runs away from you and you cannot catch it, treat it in this manner (i.e.
shoot it with an arrow)."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 412:
Narrated Ka'b bin Malik:
A lady slaughtered a sheep with a stone and then the Prophet was asked
about it and he permitted it to be eaten.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 413:
Narrated Mu'adh bin Sad or Sad bin Mu'adh:
A slave girl belonging to Ka'b used to graze some sheep at Sl'a (mountain).
Once one of her sheep was dying. She reached it (before it died) and
slaughtered it with a stone. The Prophet was asked, and he said, "Eat it."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 414:
Narrated Rafi bin Khadij:
The Prophet said, "Eat what is slaughtered (with any instrument) that makes
blood flow out, except what is slaughtered with a tooth or a nail.'

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 415:
Narrated 'Aisha:
A group of people said to the Prophet, "Some people bring us meat and we
do not know whether they have mentioned Allah's Name or not on
slaughtering the animal." He said, "Mention Allah's Name on it and eat."
Those people had embraced Islam recently.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 416:
Narrates 'Abdullah bin Mughaffal:
While we were besieging the castle of Khaibar, Somebody threw a skin full
of fat and I went ahead to take it, but on looking behind, I saw the Prophet
and I felt shy in his presence (and did not take it).

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 417:
Narrated Rafi bin Khadij:
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! We are going to face the enemy tomorrow and we
do not have knives." He said, "Hurry up (in killing the animal). If the killing
tool causes blood to flow out, and if Allah's Name is mentioned, eat (of the
slaughtered animal). But do not slaughter with a tooth or a nail. I will tell you
why: As for the tooth, it is a bone; and as for the nail, it is the knife of
Ethiopians." Then we got some camels and sheep as war booty, and one of
those camels ran away, whereupon a man shot it with an arrow and stopped
it. Allah's Apostle said, "Of these camels there are some which are as wild as
wild beasts, so if one of them (runs away and) makes you tired, treat it in
this manner."
Volume 7, Book 67, Number 418:
Narrated Asma bint Abu Bakr:
We slaughtered a horse (by Nahr) during the lifetime of the Prophet and ate
it.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 419:
Narrated Asma':
We slaughtered a horse (by Dhabh) during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle
while we were at Medina, and we ate it.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 420:
Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr:
We slaughtered a horse (by Nahr) during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle and
ate it.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 421:
Narrated Hisham bin Zaid:
Anas and I went to Al-Hakam bin Aiyub. Anas saw some boys shooting at a
tied hen. Anas said, "The Prophet has forbidden the shooting of tied or
confined animals."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 422:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
that he entered upon Yahya bin Said while one of Yahya's sons was aiming
at a hen after tying it. Ibn 'Umar walked to it and untied it. Then he brought
it and the boy and said. "Prevent your boys from tying the birds for the sake
of killing them, as I have heard the Prophet forbidding the killing of an
animal or other living thing after tying them."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 423:
Narrated Said bin Jubair:
While I was with Ibn 'Umar, we passed by a group of young men who had
tied a hen and started shooting at it. When they saw Ibn 'Umar, they
dispersed, leaving it. On that Ibn 'Umar said, "Who has done this? The
Prophet cursed the one who did so."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 424:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet cursed the one who did Muthla to an animal (i e., cut its limbs
or some other part of its body while it is still alive).

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 425:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Yazid:
The Prophet forbade An-Nuhba and Al-Muthla.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 426:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari:
I saw the Prophet eating chicken.
Volume 7, Book 67, Number 427:
Narrated Zahdam:
We were in the company of Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari and there were friendly
relations between us and this tribe of Jarm. Abu Musa was presented with a
dish containing chicken. Among the people there was sitting a red-faced
man who did not come near the food. Abu Musa said (to him), "Come on
(and eat), for I have seen Allah's Apostle eating of it (i.e. chicken)." He said,
"I have seen it eating something (dirty) and since then I have disliked it, and
have taken an oath that I shall not eat it ' Abu Musa said, "Come on, I will tell
you (or narrate to you). Once I went to Allah s Apostle with a group of AlAsh'ariyin, and met him while he was angry, distributing some camels of
Rakat. We asked for mounts but he took an oath that he would not give us
any mounts, and added, 'I have nothing to mount you on' In the meantime
some camels of booty were brought to Allah's Apostle and he asked twice,
'Where are Al-Ash'ariyin?" So he gave us five white camels with big humps.
We stayed for a short while (after we had covered a little distance), and
then I said to my companions, "Allah's Apostle has forgotten his oath. By
Allah, if we do not remind Allah's Apostle of his oath, we will never be
successful." So we returned to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! We
asked you for mounts, but you took an oath that you would not give us any
mounts; we think that you have forgotten your oath.' He said, 'It is Allah
Who has given you mounts. By Allah, and Allah willing, if I take an oath and
later find something else better than that. then I do what is better and
expiate my oath.' "

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 428:
Narrated Asma':
We slaughtered a horse during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle and ate it.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 429:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
On the Day of the battle of Khaibar, Allah's Apostle made donkey's meat
unlawful and allowed the eating of horse flesh.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 430:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet made the meat of donkeys unlawful on the day of the battle of
Khaibar.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 431:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet prohibited the eating of donkey's meat.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 432:
Narrated 'Ali:
Allah's Apostle prohibited Al-Mut'a marriage and the eating of donkey's
meat in the year of the Khaibar battle

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 433:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet prohibited the eating of donkey's meat on the day of the battle
of Khaibar, and allowed the eating of horse flesh.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 434:
Narrated Al-Bara' and Ibn Abi 'Aufa:
The Prophet prohibited the eating of donkey's meat.
Volume 7, Book 67, Number 435:
Narrated Abu Tha'alba:
Allah's Apostle prohibited the eating of donkey's meat.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 435o:
Narrated Az-Zuhri:
The Prophet prohibited the eating of beasts having fangs.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 436:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Someone came to Allah's Apostle and said, "The donkeys have been
(slaughtered and) eaten. Another man came and said, "The donkeys have
been destroyed." On that the Prophet ordered a caller to announce to the
people: Allah and His Apostle forbid you to eat the meat of donkeys, for it is
impure.' Thus the pots were turned upside down while the (donkeys') meat
was boiling in them.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 437:
Narrated 'Amr:
I said to Jabir bin Zaid, "The people claim that Allah's Apostle forbade the
eating of donkey's meat." He said, "Al-Hakam bin 'Amr Al-Ghifari used to say
so when he was with us, but Ibn 'Abbas, the great religious learned man,
refused to give a final verdict and recited:-- 'Say: I find not in that which has
been inspired to me anything forbidden to be eaten by one who wishes to
eat it, unless it be carrion, blood poured forth or the flesh of swine...' (6.145)
Volume 7, Book 67, Number 438:
Narrated Abu Tha'laba:
Allah's Apostle forbade the eating of the meat of beasts having fangs.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 439:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
Once Allah's Apostle passed by a dead sheep and said (to the people), "Why
don't you use its hide?" They said, "But it is dead," He said, "Only eating it, is
prohibited."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 440:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet passed by a dead goat and said, "There is no harm if its owners
benefit from its skin."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 441:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "None is wounded in Allah's Cause but will come on the
Day of Resurrection with his wound bleeding. The thing that will come out
of his wound will be the color of blood, but its smell will be the smell of
musk."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 442:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, 'The example of a good pious companion and an evil one
is that of a person carrying musk and another blowing a pair of bellows. The
one who is carrying musk will either give you some perfume as a present, or
you will buy some from him, or you will get a good smell from him, but the
one who is blowing a pair of bellows will either burn your clothes or you will
get a bad smell from him."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 443:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Once we provoked a rabbit at Marr-az-Zahran. The people chased it till they
got tired. Then I caught It and brought it to Abu Talha, who slaughtered it
and then sent both its pelvic pieces (or legs) to the Prophet, and the
Prophet accepted the present.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 444:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "I do not eat mastigure, but I do not prohibit its eating."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 445:
Narrated Khalid bin Al-Walid:
Allah's Apostle and I entered the house of Maimuna. A roasted mastigure
was served. Allah's Apostle stretched his hand out (to eat of it) but some
woman said, "Inform Allah's Apostle of what he is about to eat." So they
said, "It is mastigure, O Allah's Apostle!" He withdrew his hand, whereupon I
said, "O Allah's Apostle! Is it unlawful?" He said, "No, but this is not found in
the land of my people, so I dislike it." So I pulled the mastigure towards me
and ate it while Allah's Apostle was looking at me.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 446:
Narrated Maimuna
A mouse fell into the butter-fat and died. The Prophet was asked about that.
He said, "Throw away the mouse and the butter-fat that surrounded it, and
eat the rest of the butter-fat (As-Samn).

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 447:
Narrated Az-Zhuri:
regarding an animal, e.g., a mouse or some other animal that had fallen into
solid or liquid oil or butter-fat: I had been informed that a mouse had died in
butter-fat whereupon Allah's Apostle ordered that the butter-fat near it be
thrown away and the rest of the butter-fat can be eaten.

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 448:
Narrated Maimuna:
The Prophet was asked about a mouse that had fallen into butter-fat (and
died). He said, "Throw away the mouse and the portion of butter-fat around
it, and eat the rest."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 449:
Narrated Salim:
that Ibn 'Umar disliked the branding of animals on the face. Ibn 'Umar said,
"The Prophet forbade beating (animals) on the face."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 450:
Narrated Anas:
I brought a brother of mine to the Prophet to do Tahnik for him while the
Prophet was in a sheep fold of his, and I saw him branding a sheep. (The
sub-narrator said: I think Anas said, branding it on the ear.)
Volume 7, Book 67, Number 451:
Narrated Rait' bin Khadij:
I said to the Prophet, "We will be facing the enemy tomorrow and we have
no knives (for slaughtering)' He said, "If you slaughter the animal with
anything that causes its blood to flow out, and if Allah's Name is mentioned
on slaughtering it, eat of it, unless the killing instrument is a tooth or nail. I
will tell you why: As for the tooth, it is a bone; and as for the nail, it is the
knife of Ethiopians." The quick ones among the people got the war booty
while the Prophet was behind the people. So they placed the cooking pots
on the fire, but the Prophet ordered the cooking pots to be turned upside
down. Then he distributed (the war booty) among them, considering one
camel as equal to ten sheep. Then a camel belonging to the first party of
people ran away and they had no horses with them, so a man shot it with an
arrow whereby Allah stopped it. The Prophet said, "Of these animals there
are some which are as wild as wild beasts. So, if anyone of them runs away
like this, do like this (shoot it with an arrow)."

Volume 7, Book 67, Number 452:
Narrated Rafi bin Khadij:
While we were with the Prophet. on a journey, one of the camels ran away.
A man shot it with an arrow and stopped it. The Prophet said, "Of these
camels some are as wild as wild beasts, so if one of them runs away and you
cannot catch it, then do like this (shoot it with an arrow)." I said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Sometimes when we are in battles or on a journey we want to
slaughter (animals) but we have no knives." He said, "Listen! If you slaughter
the animal with anything that causes its blood to flow out, and if Allah's
Name is mentioned on slaughtering it, eat of it, provided that the
slaughtering instrument is not a tooth or a nail, as the tooth is a bone and
the nail is the knife of Ethiopians."


BOOK 68. AL-ADHA FESTIVAL SACRIFICE (ADAAHI) (453-480)
Volume 7, Book 68, Number 453:
Narrated Al-Bara:
The Prophet said (on the day of Idal-Adha), "The first thing we will do on this
day of ours, is to offer the ('Id) prayer and then return to slaughter the
sacrifice. Whoever does so, he acted according to our Sunna (tradition), and
whoever slaughtered (the sacrifice) before the prayer, what he offered was
just meat he presented to his family, and that will not be considered as
Nusak (sacrifice)." (On hearing that) Abu Burda bin Niyar got up, for he had
slaughtered the sacrifice before the prayer, and said, "I have got a six month
old ram." The Prophet said, 'Slaughter it (as a sacrifice) but it will not be
sufficient for any-one else (as a sacrifice after you). Al-Bara' added: The
Prophet said, "Whoever slaughtered (the sacrifice) after the prayer, he
slaughtered it at the right time and followed the tradition of the Muslims."

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 454:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "Whoever slaughtered the sacrifice before the prayer, he
just slaughtered it for himself, and whoever slaughtered it after the prayer,
he slaughtered it at the right time and followed the tradition of the
Muslims."

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 455:
Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir Al-Juhani:
that the Prophet distributed among his companions some animals for
sacrifice (to be slaughtered on 'Id-al-Adha). 'Uqba's share was a Jadha'a (a
six month old goat). 'Uqba said, "O Allah's Apostle! I get in my share of
Jadha'a (a six month old ram)." The Prophet said, "Slaughter it as a
sacrifice."

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 456:
Narrated 'Aisha:
that the Prophet entered upon her when she had her menses at Sarif before
entering Mecca, and she was weeping (because she was afraid that she
would not be able to perform the Hajj). The Prophet said, "What is wrong
with you? Have you got your period?" She said, "Yes." He said, "This is a
matter Allah has decreed for all the daughters of Adam, so perform all the
ceremonies of Hajj like the others, but do not perform the Tawaf around the
Ka'ba." 'Aisha added: When we were at Mina, beef was brought to me and I
asked, "What is this?" They (the people) said, "Allah's Apostle has
slaughtered some cows as sacrifices on behalf of his wives."

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 457:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said on the day of Nahr, "Whoever has slaughtered his sacrifice
before the prayer, should repeat it (slaughter another sacrifice)." A man got
up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! This is a day on which meat is desired." He
then mentioned his neighbors saying, "I have a six month old ram which is to
me better than the meat of two sheep." The Prophet allowed him to
slaughter it as a sacrifice, but I do not know whether this permission was
valid for other than that man or not. The Prophet then went towards two
rams and slaughtered them, and then the people went towards some sheep
and distributed them among themselves.

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 458:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
The Prophet said, "Time has come back to its original state which it had on
the day Allah created the Heavens and the Earth. The year is twelve months,
four of which are sacred, three of them are in succession, namely DhulQa'da, Dhul Hijja and Muharram, (the fourth being) Rajab Mudar which is
between Juma'da (ath-thamj and Sha'ban. The Prophet then asked, "Which
month is this?" We said, "Allah and his Apostle know better." He kept silent
so long that we thought that he would call it by a name other than its real
name. He said, "Isn't it the month of Dhul-Hijja?" We said, "Yes." He said,
"Which town is this?" We said, "Allah and His Apostle know better." He kept
silent so long that we thought that he would call it t,y a name other than its
real name. He said, "isn't it the town (of Mecca)?" We replied, "Yes." He
said, "What day is today?" We replied, "Allah and His Apostle know better."
He kept silent so long that we thought that he would call it by a name other
than its real name. He said, "Isn't it the day of Nahr?" We replied, "Yes." He
then said, "Your blood, properties and honor are as sacred to one another
as this day of yours in this town of yours in this month of yours. You will
meet your Lord, and He will ask you about your deeds. Beware! Do not go
astray after me by cutting the necks of each other. It is incumbent upon
those who are present to convey this message to those who are absent, for
some of those to whom it is conveyed may comprehend it better than some
of those who have heard it directly." (Muhammad, the sub-narrator, on
mentioning this used to say: The Prophet then said, "No doubt! Haven't I
delivered (Allah's) Message (to you)? Haven't I delivered Allah's message (to
you)?"

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 459:
Narrated Nafi':
'Abdullah (bin 'Umar) used to slaughter his sacrifice at the slaughtering
place (i.e the slaughtering place of the Prophet ) . Ibn 'Umar said, "Allah's
Apostle used to slaughter (camels and sheep, etc.,) as sacrifices at the
Musalla."
Volume 7, Book 68, Number 460:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet used to offer two rams as sacrifices, and I also used to offer
two rams.

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 461:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle came towards two horned rams having black and white
colors and slaughtered them with his own hands.

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 462:
Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir:
that the Prophet gave him some sheep to distribute among his companions
to slaughter as sacrifices ('Id--al--Adha). A kid was left and he told the
Prophet of that whereupon he said to him, "Slaughter it as a sacrifice (on
your behalf)."

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 463:
Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib:
An uncle of mine called Abu Burda, slaughtered his sacrifice before the 'Id
prayer. So Allah's Apostle said to him, "Your (slaughtered) sheep was just
mutton (not a sacrifice)." Abu Burda said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have got a
domestic kid." The Prophet said, "Slaughter it (as a sacrifice) but it will not
be permissible for anybody other than you" The Prophet added, "Whoever
slaughtered his sacrifice before the ('Id) prayer, he only slaughtered for
himself, and whoever slaughtered it after the prayer, he offered his sacrifice
properly and followed the tradition of the Muslims."
Volume 7, Book 68, Number 464:
Narrated Al-Bara':
Abu Burda slaughtered (the sacrifice) before the ('Id) prayer whereupon the
Prophet said to him, "Slaughter another sacrifice instead of that." Abu
Burda said, "I have nothing except a Jadha'a." (Shu'ba said: Perhaps Abu
Burda also said that Jadha'a was better than an old sheep in his opinion.)
The Prophet said, "(Never mind), slaughter it to make up for the other one,
but it will not be sufficient for anyone else after you."

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 465:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet slaughtered two rams, black and white in color (as sacrifices),
and I saw him putting his foot on their sides and mentioning Allah's Name
and Takbir (Allahu Akbar). Then he slaughtered them with his own hands.

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 466:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle entered upon me at Sarif while I was weeping (because I was
afraid that I would not be able to perform the ,Hajj). He said, "What is wrong
with you? Have you got your period?" I replied, "Yes." He said, "This is a
matter Allah has decreed for all the daughters of Adam, so perform the
ceremonies of the Hajj as the pilgrims do, but do not perform the Tawaf
around the Ka'ba." Allah's Apostle slaughtered some cows as sacrifices on
behalf of his wives.

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 467:
Narrated Al-Bara':
I heard the Prophet delivering a sermon, and he said (on the Day of 'Id-Allah.
a), "The first thing we will do on this day of ours is that we will offer the 'Id
prayer, then we will return and slaughter our sacrifices; and whoever does
so, then indeed he has followed our tradition, and whoever slaughtered his
sacrifice (before the prayer), what he offered was just meat that he
presented to his family, and that was not a sacrifice." Abu Burda got up and
said, "O Allah's Apostle! I slaughtered the sacrifice before the prayer and I
have got a Jadha'a which is better than an old sheep." The Prophet said,
"Slaughter it to make up for that, but it will not be sufficient for anybody
else after you."

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 468:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "Whoever slaughtered the sacrifice before the 'Id prayer,
should repeat it (slaughter another one)." A man said "This is the day on
which meat is desired." Then he mentioned the need of his neighbors (for
meat) and the Prophet seemed to accept his excuse. The man said, "I have a
Jadha'a which is to me better than two sheep." The Prophet allowed him (to
slaughter it as a sacrifice). But I do not know whether this permission was
general for all Muslims or not. The Prophet then went towards two rams
and slaughtered them, and the people went towards their sheep and
slaughtered them.

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 469:
Narrated Jundab bin Sufyan Al-Bajali:
I witnessed the Prophet on the Day of Nahr. He said, "Whoever slaughtered
the sacrifice before offering the 'Id prayer, should slaughter another
sacrifice in its place; and whoever has not slaughtered their sacrifice yet,
should slaughter now."
Volume 7, Book 68, Number 470:
Narrated Al-Bara':
One day Allah's Apostle offered the 'Id prayer and said, "Whoever offers our
prayer and faces our Qibla should not slaughter the sacrifice till he finishes
the 'Id prayer." Abu Burda bin Niyar got up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I
have already done it. The Prophet said, "That is something you have done
before its due time." Abu Burda said, "I have a Jadha'a which is better than
two old sheep; shall I slaughter it?" The Prophet said, "Yes, but it will not be
sufficient for anyone after you."

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 471:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet used to offer as sacrifices, two horned rams, black and white in
color, and used to put his foot on their sides and slaughter them with his
own hands.

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 472:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet offered as sacrifices, two horned rams, black and white in
color. He slaughtered them with his own hands and mentioned Allah's Name
over them and said Takbir and put his foot on their sides.

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 473:
Narrated Masruq:
that he came to 'Aisha and said to her, "O Mother of the Believers! There is a
man who sends a Hadi to Ka'ba and stays in his city and requests that his
Hadi camel be garlanded while he remains in a state of Ihram from that day
till the people finish their Ihram (after completing all the ceremonies of
Hajj)" (What do you say about it?) Masruq added, I heard the clapping of her
hands behind the curtain. She said, "I used to twist the garlands for the Hadi
of Allah's Apostle and he used to send his Hadi to Ka'ba but he never used to
regard as unlawful what was lawful for men to do with their wives till the
people returned (from the Hajj)."

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 474:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
During the lifetime of the Prophet we used to take with us the meat of the
sacrifices (of Id al Adha) to Medina. (The narrator often said. The meat of
the Hadi).

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 475:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
that once he was not present (at the time of 'Id-al-Adha) and when he came.
some meat was presented to him. and the people said (to him), 'This is the
meat of our sacrifices" He said. 'Take it away; I shall not taste it. (In his
narration) Abu Sa'id added: I got up and went to my brother, Abu Qatada
(who was his maternal brother and was one of the warriors of the battle of
Badr) and mentioned that to him He Sad. 'A new verdict was given in your
absence (i.e., meat of sacrifices was allowed to be stored and eaten later
on)."

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 476:
Narrated Salama bin Al-Aqua':
The Prophet said, "Whoever has slaughtered a sacrifice should not keep
anything of Its meat after three days." When it was the next year the people
said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall we do as we did last year?" He said, ' Eat of it
and feed of it to others and store of it for in that year the people were
having a hard time and I wanted you to help (the needy)."

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 477:
Narrated 'Aisha:
We used to salt some of the meat of sacrifice and present it to the Prophet
at Medina. Once he said, "Do not eat (of that meat) for more than three
days." That was not a final order, but (that year) he wanted us to feed of it
to others, Allah knows better.

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 478:
Narrated Abu 'Ubaid:
the freed slave of Ibn Azhar that he witnessed the Day of 'Id-al-Adha with
'Umar bin Al-Khattab. 'Umar offered the 'Id prayer before the sermon and
then delivered the sermon before the people, saying, "O people! Allah's
Apostle has forbidden you to fast (on the first day of) each of these two
'Ida, for one of them is the Day of breaking your fast, and the other is the
one, on which you eat the meat of your sacrifices."

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 479:
Narrated Abu 'Ubaid:
(in continuation of 478). Then I witnessed the 'Id with 'Uthman bin 'Affan,
and that was on a Friday. He offered the prayer before the sermon, saying,
"O people! Today you have two 'Its (festivals) together, so whoever of those
who live at Al-'Awali (suburbs) would like to wait for the Jumua prayer, he
may wait, and whoever would like to return (home) Is granted my
permission to do so." Then I witnessed (the 'Its) with 'Ali bin Abi Talib, and
he too offered the 'Id prayer before the sermon and then delivered the
sermon before the people and said, "Allah's Apostle has forbidden you to
eat the meat of your sacrifices for more than three days."

Volume 7, Book 68, Number 480:
Narrated Salim:
'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle said, "Eat of the meat of sacrifices
(of 'Id al Adha) for three days." When 'Abdullah departed from Mina, he
used to eat (bread with) oil, lest he should eat of the meat of Hadi (which is
regarded as unlawful after the three days of the 'Id).
BOOK 69. DRINKS (481-543)
Volume 7, Book 69, Number 481:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever drinks alcoholic drinks in the world and does
not repent (before dying), will be deprived of it in the Hereafter."

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 482:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
On the night Allah's Apostle was taken on a night journey (Miraj) two cups,
one containing wine and the other milk, were presented to him at
Jerusalem. He looked at it and took the cup of milk. Gabriel said, "Praise be
to Allah Who guided you to Al-Fitra (the right path); if you had taken (the
cup of) wine, your nation would have gone astray."

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 483:
Narrated Anas:
I heard from Allah's Apostle a narration which none other than I will narrate
to you. The Prophet, said, "From among the portents of the Hour are the
following: General ignorance (in religious affairs) will prevail, (religious)
knowledge will decrease, illegal sexual intercourse will prevail, alcoholic
drinks will be drunk (in abundance), men will decrease and women will
increase so much so that for every fifty women there will be one man to
look after them."

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 484:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "An adulterer, at the time he is committing illegal sexual
intercourse is not a believer; and a person, at the time of drinking an
alcoholic drink is not a believer; and a thief, at the time of stealing, is not a
believer." Ibn Shihab said: 'Abdul Malik bin Abi Bakr bin 'Abdur-Rahman bin
Al- Harith bin Hisham told me that Abu Bakr used to narrate that narration to
him on the authority of Abu Huraira. He used to add that Abu Bakr used to
mention, besides the above cases, "And he who robs (takes illegally
something by force) while the people are looking at him, is not a believer at
the time he is robbing (taking)

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 485:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
"Alcoholic drinks were prohibited (by Allah) when there was nothing of it
(special kind of wine) in Medina.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 486:
Narrated Anas:
"Alcoholic drinks were prohibited at the time we could rarely find wine
made from grapes in Medina, for most of our liquors were made from
unripe and ripe dates.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 487:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
'Umar stood up on the pulpit and said, "Now then, prohibition of alcoholic
drinks have been revealed, and these drinks are prepared from five things,
i.e.. grapes, dates, honey, wheat or barley And an alcoholic drink is that, that
disturbs the mind.
Volume 7, Book 69, Number 488:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
I was serving Abu 'Ubaida, Abu Talha and Ubai bin Ka'b with a drink
prepared from ripe and unripe dates. Then somebody came to them and
said, "Alcoholic drinks have been prohibited." (On hearing that) Abu Talha
said, "Get up. O Anas, and pour (throw) it out! So I poured (threw) it out.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 489:
Narrated Anas:
While I was waiting on my uncles and serving them with (wine prepared
from) dates----and I was the youngest of them----it was said, "Alcoholic drinks
have been prohibited." So they said (to me), "Throw it away." So I threw it
away.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 490:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Alcoholic drinks were prohibited. At that time these drinks used to be
prepared from unripe and ripe dates.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 491:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle was asked about Al-Bit. He said, "All drinks that intoxicate
are unlawful (to drink.)

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 492a:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle was asked about Al-Bit a liquor prepared from honey which
the Yemenites used to drink. Allah's Apostle said, "All drinks that intoxicate
are unlawful (to drink)."

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 492b:
Anas bin Malik said:
Allah's Apostle said, "Do not make drinks in Ad-Dubba' nor in Al-Muzaffat.
Abu Huraira used to add to them Al-Hantam and An-Naqir.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 493:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
'Umar delivered a sermon on the pulpit of Allah's Apostle, saying, "Alcoholic
drinks were prohibited by Divine Order, and these drinks used to be
prepared from five things, i.e., grapes, dates, wheat, barley and honey.
Alcoholic drink is that, that disturbs the mind." 'Umar added, "I wish Allah's
Apostle had not left us before he had given us definite verdicts concerning
three matters, i.e., how much a grandfather may inherit (of his grandson),
the inheritance of Al-Kalala (the deceased person among whose heirs there
is no father or son), and various types of Riba(1 ) (usury) ."

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 494s:
Narrated 'Umar:
"Alcoholic drinks are prepared from five things, i.e., raisins, dates. wheat,
barley and honey."

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 494v:
Narrated Abu 'Amir or Abu Malik Al-Ash'ari:
that he heard the Prophet saying, "From among my followers there will be
some people who will consider illegal sexual intercourse, the wearing of silk,
the drinking of alcoholic drinks and the use of musical instruments, as
lawful. And there will be some people who will stay near the side of a
mountain and in the evening their shepherd will come to them with their
sheep and ask them for something, but they will say to him, 'Return to us
tomorrow.' Allah will destroy them during the night and will let the
mountain fall on them, and He will transform the rest of them into monkeys
and pigs and they will remain so till the Day of Resurrection."

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 495:
Narrated Sahl:
Abu Usaid As-Sa'idi came and invited Allah's Apostle on the occasion of his
wedding. His wife who was the bride, was serving them. Do you know what
drink she prepared for Allah's Apostle ? She had soaked some dates in water
in a Tur overnight.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 496:
Narrated Jabir:
Allah's Apostle forbade the use of (certain) containers, but the Ansar said,
"We cannot dispense with them." The Prophet then said, "If so, then use
them."

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 497:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
When the Prophet forbade the use of certain containers (that were used for
preparing alcoholic drinks), somebody said to the Prophet . "But not all the
people can find skins." So he allowed them to use clay jars not covered with
pitch.
Volume 7, Book 69, Number 498:
Narrated 'Ali:
the Prophet forbade the use of Ad-Dubba' and Al Muzaffat.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 499:
Narrated Al-A'mash:
(As above, 494).

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 500:
Narrated Ibrahim:
I asked Al-Aswad, "Did you ask 'Aisha, Mother of the Believers, about the
containers in which it is disliked to prepare (non-alcoholic) drinks?" He said,
"Yes, I said to her, 'O Mother of the Believers! What containers did the
Prophet forbid to use for preparing (non-alcoholic) drinks?" She said, 'The
Prophet forbade us, (his family), to prepare (nonalcoholic) drinks in AdDubba and Al-Muzaffat.' I asked, 'Didn't you mention Al Jar and Al Hantam?'
She said, 'I tell what I have heard; shall I tell you what I have not heard?' "

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 501:
Narrated Ash-Shaibani:
I heard 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa saying, "The Prophet forbade the use of green
jars." I said, "Shall we drink out of white jars?" He said, "No."

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 502:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad
Abu Usaid As Sa'idi invited the Prophet to his wedding banquet. At that time
his wife was serving them and she was the bride. She said, ''Do you know
what (kind of syrup) I soaked (made) for Allah's Apostle? I soaked some
dates in water in a Tur (bowl) overnight. '

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 503:
Narrated Abu Al-Juwairiyya:
I asked Ibn 'Abbas about Al-Badhaq. He said, "Muhammad prohibited
alcoholic drinks before It was called Al-Badhaq (by saying), 'Any drink that
intoxicates is unlawful.' I said, 'What about good lawful drinks?' He
said,'Apart from what is lawful and good, all other things are unlawful and
not good (unclean Al-Khabith).

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 504:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to like sweet edible things and honey.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 505:
Narrated Anas:
While I was serving Abu Talha. Abu Dujana and Abu Suhail bin Al-Baida' with
a drink made from a mixture of unripe and ripe dates, alcoholic drinks, were
made unlawful, whereupon I threw it away, and I was their butler and the
youngest of them, and we used to consider that drink as an alcoholic drink
in those days

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 506:
Narrated Jabir:
The Prophet forbade the drinking of alcoholic drinks prepared from raisins,
dates, unripe dates and fresh ripe dates.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 507:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
The Prophet forbade the mixing of ripe and unripe dates and also the mixing
of dates and raisins (for preparing a syrup) but the syrup of each kind of fruit
should be prepared separately. ( One may have such drinks as long as it is
fresh )

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 508:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle was presented a bowl of milk and a bowl of wine on the
night he was taken on a journey (Al-Mi'raj).

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 509:
Narrated Um Al-Fadl:
The people doubted whether Allah's Apostle was fasting or the Day of
'Arafat or not. So I sent a cup containing milk to him and he drank it.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 510:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Abu Humaid brought a cup of mix from a place called Al-Naqi. Allah's
Apostle said to him, "Will you not cover it, even by placing a stick across its"

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 511:
Narrated Jabir:
Abu Humaid, an Ansari man, came from AnNaqi carrying a cup of milk to the
Prophet. The Prophet said, "Will you not cover it even by placing a stick
across it?"

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 512:
Narrated Al-Bara:
The Prophet came from Mecca with Abu Bakr. Abu Bakr said "We passed by
a shepherd and at that time Allah's Apostle was thirsty. I milked a little milk
in a bowl and Allah's Apostle drank till I was pleased. Suraqa bin Ju'shum
came to us riding a horse (chasing us). The Prophet invoked evil upon him,
whereupon Suraqa requested him not to invoke evil upon him, in which case
he would go back. The Prophet agreed.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 513:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The best object of charity is a she-camel which has
(newly) given birth and gives plenty of milk, or a she-goat which gives plenty
of milk; and is given to somebody to utilize its milk by milking one bowl in
the morning and one in the evening."

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 514:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: Allah's Apostle drank milk and then rinsed his mouth
and said, "It contains fat. The Prophet added: I was raised to the Lote Tree
and saw four rivers, two of which were coming out and two going in. Those
which were coming out were the Nile and the Euphrates, and those which
were going in were two rivers in paradise. Then I was given three bowls, one
containing milk, and another containing honey, and a third containing wine.
I took the bowl containing milk and drank it. It was said to me, "You and
your followers will be on the right path (of Islam)."

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 515:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Abu Talha had the largest number of datepalms from amongst the Ansars of
Medina. The dearest of his property to him was Bairuha garden which was
facing the (Prophet's) Mosque. Allah's Apostle used to enter it and drink of
its good fresh water. When the Holy Verse:-- 'By no means shall you attain
righteousness unless you spend (in charity) of that which you love.' (3.92)
was revealed, Abu Talha got up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Allah says: By
no means shall you attain righteousness unless you spend of that which you
love,' and the dearest of my property to me is the Bairuha garden and I want
to give it in charity in Allah's Cause, seeking to be rewarded by Allah for that.
So you can spend it, O Allah's Apostle, where-ever Allah instructs you. ' Allah
s Apostle said, "Good! That is a perishable (or profitable) wealth" ('Abdullah
is in doubt as to which word was used.) He said, "I have heard what you
have said but in my opinion you'd better give it to your kith and kin." On that
Abu Talha said, "I will do so, O Allah's Apostle!" Abu Talha distributed that
garden among his kith and kin and cousins.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 516:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
I saw Allah's Apostle drinking milk. He came to my house and I milked a
sheep and then mixed the milk with water from the well for Allah's Apostle.
He took the bowl and drank while on his left there was sitting Abu Bakr, and
on his right there was a bedouin. He then gave the remaining milk to the
bedouin and said, "The right! The right (first)."

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 517:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle and one of his companions entered upon an Ansari man and
the Prophet said to him, "If you have water kept overnight in a water skin,
(give us), otherwise we will drink water by putting our mouth in it." The man
was watering his garden then. He said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have water kept
overnight; let us go to the shade." So he took them both there and poured
water into a bowl and milked a domestic goat of his in it. Allah's Apostle
drank, and then the man who had come along with him, drank.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 518:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to like sweet edible things (syrup, etc.) and honey.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 519:
Narrated An-Nazzal:
All came to the gate of the courtyard (of the Mosque) and drank (water)
while he was standing and said, "Some people dislike to drink while
standing, but I saw the Prophet doing (drinking water) as you have seen me
doing now."

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 520:
Narrated An-Nazzal bin Sabra:
'Ali offered the Zuhr prayer and then sat down in the wide courtyard (of the
Mosque) of Kufa in order to deal with the affairs of the people till the 'Asr
prayer became due. Then water was brought to him and he drank of it,
washed his face, hands, head and feet. Then he stood up and drank the
remaining water while he was standing. and said, "Some people dislike to
drink water while standing thought the Prophet did as I have just done."
Volume 7, Book 69, Number 521:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet drank Zam-Zam (water) while standing.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 522:
Narrated Um Al-Fadl:
(daughter of Al-Harith) that she sent a bowl of milk to the Prophet while he
was standing (at 'Arafat) in the afternoon of the Day of 'Arafat. He took it in
his hands and drank it. Narrated Abu Nadr: The Prophet was on the back of
his camel.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 523:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Milk mixed with water was brought to Allah's Apostle while a bedouin was
on his right and Abu Bakr was on his left. He drank (of it) and then gave (it)
to the bedouin and said, 'The right" "The right (first)."

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 524:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
Allah's Apostle was offered something to drink. He drank of it while on his
right was a boy and on his left were some elderly people. He said to the boy,
"May I give these (elderly) people first?" The boy said, "By Allah, O Allah's
Apostle! I will not give up my share from you to somebody else." On that
Allah's Apostle placed the cup in the hand of that boy.
Volume 7, Book 69, Number 525:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet and one of his companions entered upon an Ansari man. The
Prophet and his companion greeted (the man) and he replied, "O Allah's
Apostle! Let my father and mother be sacrificed for you! It is hot," while he
was watering his garden. The Prophet asked him, "If you have water kept
overnight in a water skin, (give us), or else we will drink by putting our
mouths in the basin." The man was watering the garden The man said, "O
Allah's Apostle! I have water kept overnight in a water-skin. He went to the
shade and poured some water into a bowl and milked some milk from a
domestic goat in it. The Prophet drank and then gave the bowl to the man
who had come along with him to drink.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 526:
Narrated Anas:
I was waiting on my uncles, serving them with an alcoholic drink prepared
from dates, and I was the youngest of them. (Suddenly) it was said that
alcoholic drinks had been prohibited. So they said (to me), 'Throw it away."
And I threw it away The sub-narrator said: I asked Anas what their drink was
(made from), He replied, "(From) ripe dates and unripe dates."

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 527:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "When night falls (or when it is evening), stop your
children from going out, for the devils spread out at that time. But when an
hour of the night has passed, release them and close the doors and mention
Allah's Name, for Satan does not open a closed door. Tie the mouth of your
water-skin and mention Allah's Name; cover your containers and utensils
and mention Allah's Name. Cover them even by placing something across it,
and extinguish your lamps. "
Volume 7, Book 69, Number 528:
Narrated Jabir:
Allah's Apostle said, "Extinguish the lamps when you go to bed; close your
doors; tie the mouths of your water skins, and cover the food and drinks." I
think he added, ". . . even with a stick you place across the container."

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 529:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle forbade the bending of the mouths of water skins for the
sake of drinking from them

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 530:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
I heard Allah's Apostle forbidding the drinking of water by bending the
mouths of water skins, i.e., drinking from the mouths directly.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 531:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle forbade drinking directly from the mouth of a water skin or
other leather containers. and forbade preventing one's neighbor from fixing
a peg in (the wall of) one's house.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 532:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet forbade the drinking of water directly from the mouth of a
water skin .

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 533:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet forbade the drinking of water direct from the mouth of a
water-skin.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 534:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
Allah's Apostle said, "When you drink (water), do not breath in the vessel;
and when you urinate, do not touch your penis with your right hand. And
when you cleanse yourself after defecation, do not use your right hand."

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 535:
Narrated Thumama bin Abdullah:
Anas used to breathe twice or thrice in the vessel (while drinking) and used
to say that the Prophet; used to take three breaths while drinking.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 536:
Narrated Ibn Abi Laila:
While Hudhaita was at Mada'in, he asked for water. The chief of the village
brought him a silver vessel. Hudhaifa threw it away and said, "I have thrown
it away because I told him not to use it, but he has not stopped using it. The
Prophet forbade us to wear clothes of silk or Dibaj, and to drink in gold or
silver utensils, and said, 'These things are for them (unbelievers) in this
world and for you (Muslims) in the Hereafter.' "
Volume 7, Book 69, Number 537:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
The Prophet said, "Do not drink in gold or silver utensils, and do not wear
clothes of silk or Dibaj, for these things are for them (unbelievers) in this
world and for you in the Hereafter."

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 538:
Narrated Um Salama:
(the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle said, "He who drinks in silver
utensils is only filling his abdomen with Hell Fire."

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 539:
Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib:
Allah's Apostle ordered us to do seven things and forbade us from seven. He
ordered us to visit the sick, to follow funeral processions, (to say) to a
sneezer, (May Allah bestow His Mercy on you, if he says, Praise be to Allah),
to accept invitations, to greet (everybody), to help the oppressed and to
help others to fulfill their oaths. He forbade us to wear gold rings, to drink in
silver (utensils), to use Mayathir (silken carpets placed on saddles), to wear
Al-Qissi (a kind of silken cloth), to wear silk, Dibaj or Istabraq (two kinds of
silk).

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 540:
Narrated Um Al-Fadl:
that the people were in doubt whether the Prophet was fasting on the Day
of 'Arafat or not, so a (wooden) drinking vessel full of milk was sent to him,
and he drank it
Volume 7, Book 69, Number 541:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
An Arab lady was mentioned to the Prophet so he asked Abu Usaid As-Sa'idi
to send for her, and he sent for her and she came and stayed in the castle of
Bani Sa'ida. The Prophet came out and went to her and entered upon her.
Behold, it was a lady sitting with a drooping head. When the Prophet spoke
to her, she said, "I seek refuge with Allah from you." He said, "I grant you
refuge from me." They said to her, "Do you know who this is?" She said,
"No." They said, "This is Allah's Apostle who has come to command your
hand in marriage." She said, "I am very unlucky to lose this chance." Then
the Prophet and his companions went towards the shed of Bani Sa'ida and
sat there. Then he said, "Give us water, O Sahl!" So I took out this drinking
bowl and gave them water in it. The sub-narrator added: Sahl took out for us
that very drinking bowl and we all drank from it. Later on Umar bin 'Abdul
'Aziz requested Sahl to give it to him as a present, and he gave it to him as a
present.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 542:
Narrated 'Asim al-Ahwal:
I saw the drinking bowl of the Prophet with Anas bin Malik, and it had been
broken, and he had mended it with silver plates. That drinking bowl was
quite wide and made of Nadar wood, Anas said, "I gave water to the
Prophet in that bowl more than so-and-so (for a long period)." Ibn Sirin said:
Around that bowl there was an iron ring, and Anas wanted to replace it with
a silver or gold ring, but Abu Talha said to him, "Do not change a thing that
Allah's Apostle has made." So Anas left it as it was.

Volume 7, Book 69, Number 543:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
I was with the Prophet and the time for the 'Asr prayer became due. We had
no water with us except a little which was put in a vessel and was brought
to the Prophet . He put his hand into it and spread out his fingers and then
said, "Come along! Hurry up! All those who want to perform ablution. The
blessing is from Allah.'' I saw the water gushing out from his fingers. So the
people performed the ablution and drank, and I tried to drink more of that
water (beyond my thirst and capacity), for I knew that it was a blessing. The
sub-narrator said: I asked Jabir, "How many persons were you then?" He
replied, "We were one-thousand four hundred men." Salim said: Jabir said,
1500.
BOOK 70. PATIENTS (544-581)
Volume 7, Book 70, Number 544:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle said, "No calamity befalls a Muslim
but that Allah expiates some of his sins because of it, even though it were
the prick he receives from a thorn."

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 545:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri and Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "No fatigue, nor disease, nor sorrow, nor sadness, nor
hurt, nor distress befalls a Muslim, even if it were the prick he receives from
a thorn, but that Allah expiates some of his sins for that."

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 546:
Narrated Kab:
The Prophet said, "The example of a believer is that of a fresh tender plant,
which the wind bends lt sometimes and some other time it makes it straight.
And the example of a hypocrite is that of a pine tree which keeps straight till
once it is uprooted suddenly.

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 547:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The example of a believer is that of a fresh tender
plant; from whatever direction the wind comes, it bends it, but when the
wind becomes quiet, it becomes straight again. Similarly, a believer is
afflicted with calamities (but he remains patient till Allah removes his
difficulties.) And an impious wicked person is like a pine tree which keeps
hard and straight till Allah cuts (breaks) it down when He wishes." (See
Hadith No. 558, Vol. 9.)

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 548:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If Allah wants to do good to somebody, He afflicts him
with trials."

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 549:
Narrated Aisha:
I never saw anybody suffering so much from sickness as Allah's Apostle

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 550:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
I visited the Prophet during his ailments and he was suffering from a high
fever. I said, "You have a high fever. Is it because you will have a double
reward for it?" He said, "Yes, for no Muslim is afflicted with any harm but
that Allah will remove his sins as the leaves of a tree fall down."

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 551:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
I visited Allah's Apostle while he was suffering from a high fever. I said, "O
Allah's Apostle! You have a high fever." He said, "Yes, I have as much fever
as two men of you." I said, "Is it because you will have a double reward?" He
said, "Yes, it is so. No Muslim is afflicted with any harm, even if it were the
prick of a thorn, but that Allah expiates his sins because of that, as a tree
sheds its leaves."

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 552:
Narrated Abu Muisa Al-Ash'ari:
The Prophet said, "Feed the hungry, visit the sick, and set free the captives."

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 553:
Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib:
Allah's Apostle ordered us to do seven things and forbade us to do seven
other things. He forbade us to wear gold rings, silk, Dibaj, Istabriq, Qissy,
and Maithara; and ordered us to accompany funeral processions, visit the
sick and greet everybody. (See Hadith No. 104)

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 554:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Once I fell ill. The Prophet and Abu Bakr came walking to pay me a visit and
found me unconscious. The Prophet performed ablution and then poured
the remaining water on me, and I came to my senses to see the Prophet. I
said, "O Allah's Apostle! What shall I do with my property? How shall I
dispose of (distribute) my property?" He did not reply till the Verse of
inheritance was revealed.

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 555:
Narrated 'Ata bin Abi Rabah:
Ibn 'Abbas said to me, "Shall I show you a woman of the people of
Paradise?" I said, "Yes." He said, "This black lady came to the Prophet and
said, 'I get attacks of epilepsy and my body becomes uncovered; please
invoke Allah for me.' The Prophet said (to her), 'If you wish, be patient and
you will have (enter) Paradise; and if you wish, I will invoke Allah to cure
you.' She said, 'I will remain patient,' and added, 'but I become uncovered,
so please invoke Allah for me that I may not become uncovered.' So he
invoked Allah for her."

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 556:
Narrated 'Ata:
That he had seen Um Zafar, the tall black lady, at (holding) the curtain of the
Ka'ba.

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 557:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Allah said, 'If I deprive my slave of his two
beloved things (i.e., his eyes) and he remains patient, I will let him enter
Paradise in compensation for them.'"

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 558:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When Allah's Apostle emigrated to Medina, Abu Bakr and Bilal got a fever. I
entered upon them and asked, "O my father! How are you? O Bilal! How are
you?" Whenever fever attacked Abu Bakr, he would recite the following
poetic verses: 'Everybody is staying alive among his people, yet death is
nearer to him than his shoe laces." And whenever the fever deserted Bilal,
he would recite (two poetic lines): 'Would that I could stay overnight in a
valley wherein I would be surrounded by Idhkhir and Jalil (two kinds of good
smelling grass). Would that one day I would drink of the water of Majinna
and would that Shama and Tafil (two mountains at Mecca) would appear to
me.' Then I came and informed Allah's Apostle about that, whereupon he
said, "O Allah! Make us love Medina as much or more than we love Mecca. O
Allah! Make it healthy and bless its Mudd and Sa for us, and take away its
fever and put it in Al'Juhfa."

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 559:
Narrated Abu 'Uthman:
Usama bin Zaid said that while he. Sad and Ubai bin Ka'b were with the
Prophet a daughter of the Prophet sent a message to him, saying. 'My
daughter is dying; please come to us." The Prophet sent her his greetings
and added "It is for Allah what He takes, and what He gives; and everything
before His sight has a limited period. So she should hope for Allah's reward
and remain patient." She again sent a message, beseeching him by Allah, to
come. So the Prophet got up. and so did we (and went there). The child was
placed on his lap while his breath was irregular. Tears flowed from the eyes
of the Prophet. Sad said to him, "What is this, O Allah's Apostle?" He said.
"This Is Mercy which Allah has embedded in the hearts of whomever He
wished of His slaves. And Allah does not bestow His Mercy, except on the
merciful among His slaves. (See Hadith No. 373 Vol. 2)

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 560:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet went to visit a sick bedouin. Whenever the Prophet went to a
patient, he used to say to him, "Don't worry, if Allah will, it will be expiation
(for your sins):" The bedouin said, "You say expiation? No, it is but a fever
that is boiling or harassing an old man and will lead him to his grave without
his will." The Prophet said, "Then, yes, it is so."

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 561:
Narrated Anas:
A Jewish boy used to serve the Prophet and became ill. The Prophet went to
pay him a visit and said to him, "Embrace Islam," and he did embrace Islam.
Al-Musaiyab said: When Abu Talib was on his deathbed, the Prophet visited
him.

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 562:
Narrated 'Aisha:
During the ailment of the Prophet some people came to visits him. He led
them in prayer while sitting. but they prayed standing, so he waved to them
to sit down. When he had finished the prayer, he said, "An Imam is to be
followed, so when he bows, you should bow. and when he raises his head,
you should raise yours, and if he prays sitting. you should pray sitting." Abu
Abdullah said Al-Humaidi said, (The order of ) "This narration has been
abrogated by the last action of the Prophet as he led the prayer sitting,
while the people prayed standing behind him'

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 563:
Narrated Sad:
I became seriously ill at Mecca and the Prophet came to visit me. I said, "O
Allah's Apostle! I shall leave behind me a good fortune, but my heir is my
only daughter; shall I bequeath two third of my property to be spent in
charity and leave one third (for my heir)?" He said, "No." I said, "Shall I
bequeath half and leave half?" He said, "No." I said, "Shall I bequeath one
third and leave two thirds?" He said, "One third is alright, though even one
third is too much." Then he placed his hand on his forehead and passed it
over my face and abdomen and said, "O Allah! Cure Sad and complete his
emigration." I feel as if I have been feeling the coldness of his hand on my
liver ever since.

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 564:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud:
I visited Allah's Apostle while he was suffering from a high fever. I touched
him with my hand and said, "O Allah's Apostle! You have a high fever."
Allah's Apostle said, "Yes, I have as much fever as two men of you have." I
said, "Is it because you will get a double reward?" Allah's Apostle said, "Yes,
no Muslim is afflicted with harm because of sickness or some other
inconvenience, but that Allah will remove his sins for him as a tree sheds its
leaves."

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 565:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
I visited the Prophet during his illness and touched him while he was having
a fever. I said to him, "You have a high fever; is it because you will get a
double reward?" He said, "Yes. No Muslim is afflicted with any harm, but
that his sins will be annulled as the leave of a tree fall down."

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 566:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle entered upon sick man to pay him a visit, and said to him,
"Don't worry, Allah willing, (your sickness will be) an expiation for your
sins." The man said, "No, it is but a fever that is boiling within an old man
and will send him to his grave." On that, the Prophet said, "Then yes, it is
so."

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 567:
Narrated Usama bin Zaid:
The Prophet rode a donkey having a saddle with a Fadakiyya velvet
covering. He mounted me behind him and went to visit Sad bin 'Ubada, and
that had been before the battle of Badr. The Prophet proceeded till he
passed by a gathering in which 'Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul was present, and
that had been before 'Abdullah embraced Islam. The gathering comprised of
Muslims, polytheists, i.e., isolators and Jews. 'Abdullah bin Rawaha was also
present in that gathering. When dust raised by the donkey covered the
gathering, 'Abdullah bin Ubai covered his nose with his upper garment and
said, "Do not trouble us with dust." The Prophet greeted them, stopped and
dismounted. Then he invited them to Allah (i.e., to embrace Islam) and
recited to them some verses of the Holy Qur'an. On that, 'Abdullah bin Ubai
said, "O man ! There is nothing better than what you say if it is true. Do not
trouble us with it in our gathering, but return to your house, and if
somebody comes to you, teach him there." On that 'Abdullah bin Rawaha
said, Yes, O Allah's Apostle! Bring your teachings to our gathering, for we
love that." So the Muslims, the pagans and the Jews started abusing each
other till they were about to fight. The Prophet kept on quietening them till
they became calm. Thereupon the Prophet mounted his animal and
proceeded till he entered upon Sad bin Ubada. He said to him "O Sad! Have
you not heard what Abu Hubab (i.e., 'Abdullah bin Ubai) said?" Sad said, 'O
Allah's Apostle! Excuse and forgive him, for Allah has given you what He has
given you. The people of this town (Medina decided unanimously to crown
him and make him their chief by placing a turban on his head, but when that
was prevented by the Truth which Allah had given you he ('Abdullah bin
Ubai) was grieved out of jealously, and that was the reason which caused
him to behave in the way you have seen."

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 568:
Narrated Jabir:
The Prophet came to visit me (while I was sick) and he was riding neither a
mule, nor a horse.

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 569:
Narrated Ka'b bin 'Ujara:
The Prophet passed by me while I was kindling a fire under a (cooking) pot.
He said, "Do the lice of your head trouble you?" I said, "Yes." So he called a
barber to shave my head and ordered me to make expiation for that."

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 570:
Narrated Al-Qasim bin Muhammad:
'Aisha, (complaining of headache) said, "Oh, my head"! Allah's Apostle said,
"I wish that had happened while I was still living, for then I would ask Allah's
Forgiveness for you and invoke Allah for you." Aisha said, "Wa thuklayah! By
Allah, I think you want me to die; and If this should happen, you would
spend the last part of the day sleeping with one of your wives!" The Prophet
said, "Nay, I should say, 'Oh my head!' I felt like sending for Abu Bakr and his
son, and appoint him as my successor lest some people claimed something
or some others wished something, but then I said (to myself), 'Allah would
not allow it to be otherwise, and the Muslims would prevent it to be
otherwise".

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 571:
Narrated Ibn Mas'ud:
I visited the Prophet while he was having a high fever. I touched him an said,
"You have a very high fever" He said, "Yes, as much fever as two me of you
may have." I said. "you will have a double reward?" He said, "Yes No Muslim
is afflicted with hurt caused by disease or some other inconvenience, but
that Allah will remove his sins as a tree sheds its leaves."

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 572:
Narrated Sad:
Allah's Apostle came to visit me during my ailment which had been
aggravated during Hajjat-al-Wada'. I said to him, "You see how sick I am. I
have much property but have no heir except my only daughter May I give
two thirds of my property in charity?"! He said, "No." I said, "Half of it?" He
said, "No." I said "One third?" He said, "One third is too much, for to leave
your heirs rich is better than to leave them poor, begging of others. Nothing
you spend seeking Allah's pleasure but you shall get a reward for it, even for
what you put in the mouth of your wife."

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 573:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
When Allah's Apostle was on his death-bed and in the house there were
some people among whom was 'Umar bin Al-Khattab, the Prophet said,
"Come, let me write for you a statement after which you will not go astray."
'Umar said, "The Prophet is seriously ill and you have the Qur'an; so the
Book of Allah is enough for us." The people present in the house differed
and quarrelled. Some said "Go near so that the Prophet may write for you a
statement after which you will not go astray," while the others said as Umar
said. When they caused a hue and cry before the Prophet, Allah's Apostle
said, "Go away!" Narrated 'Ubaidullah: Ibn 'Abbas used to say, "It was very
unfortunate that Allah's Apostle was prevented from writing that statement
for them because of their disagreement and noise."

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 574:
Narrated As-Sa'ib:
My aunt took me to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! My nephew
is- ill." The Prophet touched my head with his hand and invoked Allah to
bless me. He then performed ablution and I drank of the remaining water of
his ablution and then stood behind his back and saw "Khatam AnNubuwwa" (The Seal of Prophethood) between his shoulders like a button
of a tent.
Volume 7, Book 70, Number 575:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "None of you should wish for death because of a calamity
befalling him; but if he has to wish for death, he should say: "O Allah! Keep
me alive as long as life is better for me, and let me die if death is better for
me.' "

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 576:
Narrated Qais bin Abi Hazim:
We went to pay a visit to Khabbab (who was sick) and he had been branded
(cauterized) at seven places in his body. He said, "Our companions who died
(during the lifetime of the Prophet) left (this world) without having their
rewards reduced through enjoying the pleasures of this life, but we have got
(so much) wealth that we find no way to spend It except on the
construction of buildings Had the Prophet not forbidden us to wish for
death, I would have wished for it.' We visited him for the second time while
he was building a wall. He said, A Muslim is rewarded (in the Hereafter) for
whatever he spends except for something that he spends on building."

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 577:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "The good deeds of any person will not make
him enter Paradise." (i.e., None can enter Paradise through his good deeds.)
They (the Prophet's companions) said, 'Not even you, O Allah's Apostle?' He
said, "Not even myself, unless Allah bestows His favor and mercy on me." So
be moderate in your religious deeds and do the deeds that are within your
ability: and none of you should wish for death, for if he is a good doer, he
may increase his good deeds, and if he is an evil doer, he may repent to
Allah."
Volume 7, Book 70, Number 578:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I heard the Prophet , who was resting against me, saying, "O Allah! Excuse
me and bestow Your Mercy on me and let me join with the highest
companions (in Paradise)." See Qur'an (4.69)

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 579:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Whenever Allah's Apostle paid a visit to a patient, or a patient was brought
to him, he used to invoke Allah, saying, "Take away the disease, O the Lord
of the people! Cure him as You are the One Who cures. There is no cure but
Yours, a cure that leaves no disease."

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 580:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
The Prophet came to me while I was ill. He performed ablution and threw
the remaining water on me (or said, "Pour it on him) " When I came to my
senses I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have no son or father to be my heir, so
how will be my inheritance?" Then the Verse of inheritance was revealed.

Volume 7, Book 70, Number 581:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When Allah's Apostle emigrated to Medina, Abu Bakr and Bilal had a fever. I
entered upon them and said, "O my father! How are you? O Bilal! How are
you?" Whenever Abu Bakr got the fever he used to say, "Everybody is
staying alive with his people, yet death is nearer to him than his shoe laces."
And when fever deserted Bilal, he would recite (two poetic verses): "Would
that I could stay overnight in a valley wherein I would be surrounded by
Idhkhir and Jalil (two kinds of good smelling grass). Would that one day I
could drink of the water of Majinna, and would that Shama and Tafil (two
mountains at Mecca) would appear to me!" I went to Allah's Apostle and
informed him about that. He said, "O Allah! Make us love Medina as much or
more than we love Mecca, and make it healthy, and bless its Sa and its
Mudd, and take away its fever and put it in Al-Juhfa." (See Hadith No 558) .
BOOK 71. MEDICINE (582-673)
Volume 7, Book 71, Number 582:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "There is no disease that Allah has created, except that He
also has created its treatment."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 583:
Narrated Rubai bint Mu'adh bin Afra:
We used to go for Military expeditions along with Allah's Apostle and
provide the people with water, serve them and bring the dead and the
wounded back to Medina.

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 584:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
(The Prophet said), "Healing is in three things: A gulp of honey, cupping, and
branding with fire (cauterizing)." But I forbid my followers to use
(cauterization) branding with fire."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 585:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "Healing is in three things: cupping, a gulp of honey or
cauterization, (branding with fire) but I forbid my followers to use
cauterization (branding with fire)."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 586:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to like sweet edible things and honey.

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 587:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
I heard the Prophet saying, "If there is any healing in your medicines, then it
is in cupping, a gulp of honey or branding with fire (cauterization) that suits
the ailment, but I don't like to be (cauterized) branded with fire."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 588:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
A man came to the Prophet and said, "My brother has some abdominal
trouble." The Prophet said to him "Let him drink honey." The man came for
the second time and the Prophet said to him, 'Let him drink honey." He
came for the third time and the Prophet said, "Let him drink honey." He
returned again and said, "I have done that ' The Prophet then said, "Allah
has said the truth, but your brother's abdomen has told a lie. Let him drink
honey." So he made him drink honey and he was cured.

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 589:
Narrated Anas:
Some people were sick and they said, "O Allah's Apostle! Give us shelter and
food. So when they became healthy they said, "The weather of Medina is
not suitable for us." So he sent them to Al-Harra with some she-camels of his
and said, "Drink of their milk." But when they became healthy, they killed
the shepherd of the Prophet and drove away his camels. The Prophet sent
some people in their pursuit. Then he got their hands and feet cut and their
eyes were branded with heated pieces of iron. I saw one of them licking the
earth with his tongue till he died.
Volume 7, Book 71, Number 590:
Narrated Anas:
The climate of Medina did not suit some people, so the Prophet ordered
them to follow his shepherd, i.e. his camels, and drink their milk and urine
(as a medicine). So they followed the shepherd that is the camels and drank
their milk and urine till their bodies became healthy. Then they killed the
shepherd and drove away the camels. When the news reached the Prophet
he sent some people in their pursuit. When they were brought, he cut their
hands and feet and their eyes were branded with heated pieces of iron.

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 591:
Narrated Khalid bin Sad:
We went out and Ghalib bin Abjar was accompanying us. He fell ill on the
way and when we arrived at Medina he was still sick. Ibn Abi 'Atiq came to
visit him and said to us, "Treat him with black cumin. Take five or seven
seeds and crush them (mix the powder with oil) and drop the resulting
mixture into both nostrils, for 'Aisha has narrated to me that she heard the
Prophet saying, 'This black cumin is healing for all diseases except As-Sam.'
Aisha said, 'What is As-Sam?' He said, 'Death."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 592:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "There is healing in black cumin for all
diseases except death."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 593:
Narrated 'Ursa:
Aisha used to recommend At-Talbina for the sick and for such a person as
grieved over a dead person. She used to say, "I heard Allah's Apostle saying,
'At-Talbina gives rest to the heart of the patient and makes it active and
relieves some of his sorrow and grief.' "

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 594:
Narrated Hisham's father:
'Aisha used to recommend At-Talbina and used to say, "It is disliked (by the
patient) although it is beneficial.''

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 595:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet was cupped and he paid the wages to the one who had cupped
him and then took Su'ut (Medicine sniffed by nose).

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 596:
Narrated Um Qais bint Mihsan:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Treat with the Indian incense, for it has healing
for seven diseases; it is to be sniffed by one having throat trouble, and to be
put into one side of the mouth of one suffering from pleurisy." Once I went
to Allah's Apostle with a son of mine who would not eat any food, and the
boy passed urine on him whereupon he asked for some water and sprinkled
it over the place of urine.

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 597:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet was cupped while he was fasting.
Volume 7, Book 71, Number 598:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet was cupped while he was in a state of Ihram.

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 599:
Narrated Anas:
that he was asked about the wages of the one who cups others. He said,
'Allah's Apostle was cupped by Abd Taiba, to whom he gave two Sa of food
and interceded for him with his masters who consequently reduced what
they used to charge him daily. Then the Prophet s said, "The best medicines
you may treat yourselves with are cupping and sea incense.' He added, "You
should not torture your children by treating tonsillitis by pressing the tonsils
or the palate with the finger, but use incense."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 600:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
that he paid Al-Muqanna a visit during his illness and said, "I will not leave till
he gets cupped, for I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "There is healing in
cupping."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 601:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Buhaina:
Allah's Apostle was cupped on the middle of his head at Lahl Jamal on his
way to Mecca while he was in a state of Ihram. Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: Allah's
Apostle was cupped on his head.
Volume 7, Book 71, Number 602:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet was cupped on his head for an ailment he was suffering from
while he was in a state of Ihram. at a water place called Lahl Jamal. Ibn
'Abbas further said: Allah s Apostle was cupped on his head for unilateral
headache while he was in a state of Ihram .

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 603:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
I heard the Prophet saying, "If there is any good in your medicines, then it is
in a gulp of honey, a cupping operation, or branding (cauterization), but I do
not like to be (cauterized) branded.

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 604:
Narrated Ka'b bin Ujrah:
The Prophet came to me during the period of Al-Hudaibiya, while I was
lighting fire underneath a cooking pot and lice were falling down my head.
He said, "Do your lice hurt your?" I said, "Yes." He said, "Shave your head
and fast for three days or feed six poor persons or slaughter a sheep as a
sacrifice:"

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 605:
Narrated Jabir:
The Prophet said, "If there is any healing in your medicines then it is a
cupping operation, or branding (cauterization), but I do not like to be
(cauterized) branded."
Volume 7, Book 71, Number 606:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle said, 'Nations were displayed before me; one or two
prophets would pass by along with a few followers. A prophet would pass
by accompanied by nobody. Then a big crowd of people passed in front of
me and I asked, Who are they Are they my followers?" It was said, 'No. It is
Moses and his followers It was said to me, 'Look at the horizon.'' Behold!
There was a multitude of people filling the horizon. Then it was said to me,
'Look there and there about the stretching sky! Behold! There was a
multitude filling the horizon,' It was said to me, 'This is your nation out of
whom seventy thousand shall enter Paradise without reckoning.' "Then the
Prophet entered his house without telling his companions who they (the
70,000) were. So the people started talking about the issue and said, "It is
we who have believed in Allah and followed His Apostle; therefore those
people are either ourselves or our children who are born m the Islamic era,
for we were born in the Pre-lslamic Period of Ignorance.'' When the Prophet
heard of that, he came out and said. "Those people are those who do not
treat themselves with Ruqya, nor do they believe in bad or good omen
(from birds etc.) nor do they get themselves branded (Cauterized). but they
put their trust (only) in their Lord " On that 'Ukasha bin Muhsin said. "Am I
one of them, O Allah's Apostle?' The Prophet said, "Yes." Then another
person got up and said, "Am I one of them?" The Prophet said, 'Ukasha has
anticipated you."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 607:
Narrated Um Salama:
The husband of a lady died and her eyes became sore and the people
mentioned her story to the Prophet They asked him whether it was
permissible for her to use kohl as her eyes were exposed to danger. He said,
"Previously, when one of you was bereaved by a husband she would stay in
her dirty clothes in a bad unhealthy house (for one year), and when a dog
passed by, she would throw a globe of dung. No, (she should observe the
prescribed period Idda) for four months and ten days.'

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 608:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, '(There is) no 'Adwa (no contagious disease is conveyed
without Allah's permission). nor is there any bad omen (from birds), nor is
there any Hamah, nor is there any bad omen in the month of Safar, and one
should run away from the leper as one runs away from a lion ''

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 609:
Narrated Said bin Zaid:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Truffles are like Manna (i.e. they grow naturally
without man's care) and their water heals eye diseases."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 610:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas and 'Aisha:
Abu Bakr kissed (the forehead of) the Prophet when he was dead. 'Aisha
added: We put medicine in one side of his mouth but he started waving us
not to insert the medicine into his mouth. We said, "He dislikes the medicine
as a patient usually does." But when he came to his senses he said, "Did I not
forbid you to put medicine (by force) in the side of my mouth?" We said,
"We thought it was just because a patient usually dislikes medicine." He
said, "None of those who are in the house but will be forced to take
medicine in the side of his mouth while I am watching, except Al-'Abbas, for
he had not witnessed your deed."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 611:
Narrated Um Qais:
I went to Allah's Apostle along with a a son of mine whose palate and tonsils
I had pressed with my finger as a treatment for a (throat and tonsil) disease.
The Prophet said, "Why do you pain your children by pressing their throats!
Use Ud Al-Hindi (certain Indian incense) for it cures seven diseases, one of
which is pleurisy. It is used as a snuff for treating throat and tonsil disease
and it is inserted into one side of the mouth of one suffering from pleurisy."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 612:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet)
When the health of Allah's Apostle deteriorated and his condition became
serious, he asked the permission of all his wives to allow him to be treated In
my house, and they allowed him. He came out, supported by two men and
his legs were dragging on the ground between Abbas and another man.
(The sub-narrator told Ibn 'Abbas who said: Do you know who was the other
man whom 'Aisha did not mention? The sub-narrator said: No. Ibn Abbas
said: It was 'Ali.) 'Aisha added: When the Prophet entered my house and his
disease became aggravated, he said, "Pour on me seven water skins full of
water (the tying ribbons of which had not been untied) so that I may give
some advice to the people." So we made him sit in a tub belonging to Hafsa,
the wife of the Prophet and started pouring water on him from those water
skins till he waved us to stop. Then he went out to the people and led them
in prayer and delivered a speech before them.

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 613:
Narrated Um Qais :
that she took to Allah's Apostle one of her sons whose palate and tonsils
she had pressed because he had throat trouble. The Prophet said, "Why do
you pain your children by getting the palate pressed like that? Use the Ud Al-
Hindi (certain Indian incense) for it cures seven diseases one of which is
pleurisy."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 614:
Narrated Abu Said:
A man came to the prophet and said, 'My brother has got loose motions.
The Prophet said, Let him drink honey." The man again (came) and said, 'I
made him drink (honey) but that made him worse.' The Prophet said, 'Allah
has said the Truth, and the abdomen of your brother has told a lie." (See
Hadith No. 88)

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 615:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, 'There is no 'Adha (no disease is conveyed from the sick
to the healthy without Allah's permission), nor Safar, nor Hama." A bedouin
stood up and said, "Then what about my camels? They are like deer on the
sand, but when a mangy camel comes and mixes with them, they all get
infected with mangy." The Prophet said, "Then who conveyed the (mange)
disease to the first one?"

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 616:
Narrated Um Oais:
that she took to Allah's Apostle one of her sons whose palate and tonsils
she had pressed to treat a throat trouble. The Prophet said, "Be afraid of
Allah! Why do you pain your children by having their tonsils pressed like
that? Use the Ud Al-Hindi (a certain Indian incense) for it cures seven
diseases, one of which is pleurisy."
Volume 7, Book 71, Number 617:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle allowed one of the Ansar families to treat persons who have
taken poison and also who are suffering from ear ailment with Ruqya. Anas
added: I got myself branded cauterized) for pleurisy, when Allah's Apostle
was still alive. Abu Talha, Anas bin An-Nadr and Zaid bin Thabit witnessed
that, and it was Abu Talha who branded (cauterized) me.

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 618:
Narrated Sahl bin Saud As-Sa'idi:
When the helmet broke on the head of the Prophet and his face became
covered with blood and his incisor tooth broke (i.e. during the battle of
Uhud), 'Ali used to bring water in his shield while Fatima was washing the
blood off his face. When Fatima saw that the bleeding increased because of
the water, she took a mat (of palm leaves), burnt it, and stuck it (the burnt
ashes) on the wound of Allah's Apostle, whereupon the bleeding stopped.

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 619:
Narrated Nazi':
Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "The Prophet said, 'Fever is from the heat of Hell,
so put it out (cool it) with water.' " Nafi' added: 'Abdullah used to say, "O
Allah! Relieve us from the punishment," (when he suffered from fever).

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 620:
Narrated Fatima bint Al-Mundhir:
Whenever a lady suffering from fever was brought to Asma' bint Abu Bakr,
she used to invoke Allah for her and then sprinkle some water on her body,
at the chest and say, "Allah's Apostle used to order us to abate fever with
water."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 621:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "Fever is from the heat of Hell, so abate fever with water."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 622:
Narrated Rafi bin Khadij:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Fever is from the heat of Hell, so abate fever
with water."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 623:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Some people from the tribes of 'Ukl and 'Uraina came to Allah's Apostle and
embraced Islam and said, "O Allah's Apostle! We are owners of livestock and
have never been farmers," and they found the climate of Medina unsuitable
for them. So Allah's Apostle ordered that they be given some camels and a
shepherd, and ordered them to go out with those camels and drink their
milk and urine. So they set out, but when they reached a place called AlHarra, they reverted to disbelief after their conversion to Islam, killed the
shepherd and drove away the camels. When this news reached the Prophet
he sent in their pursuit (and they were caught and brought). The Prophet
ordered that their eyes be branded with heated iron bars and their hands be
cut off, and they were left at Al-Harra till they died in that state.

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 624:
Narrated Saud
The Prophet said, "If you hear of an outbreak of plague in a land, do not
enter it; but if the plague breaks out in a place while you are in it, do not
leave that place."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 625:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
'Umar bin Al-Khattab departed for Sham and when he reached Sargh, the
commanders of the (Muslim) army, Abu 'Ubaida bin Al-Jarrah and his
companions met him and told him that an epidemic had broken out in Sham.
'Umar said, "Call for me the early emigrants." So 'Umar called them,
consulted them and informed them that an epidemic had broken out in
Sham. Those people differed in their opinions. Some of them said, "We have
come out for a purpose and we do not think that it is proper to give it up,"
while others said (to 'Umar), "You have along with you. other people and
the companions of Allah's Apostle so do not advise that we take them to
this epidemic." 'Umar said to them, "Leave me now." Then he said, "Call the
Ansar for me." I called them and he consulted them and they followed the
way of the emigrants and differed as they did. He then said to them, Leave
me now," and added, "Call for me the old people of Quraish who emigrated
in the year of the Conquest of Mecca." I called them and they gave a
unanimous opinion saying, "We advise that you should return with the
people and do not take them to that (place) of epidemic." So 'Umar made
an announcement, "I will ride back to Medina in the morning, so you should
do the same." Abu 'Ubaida bin Al-Jarrah said (to 'Umar), "Are you running
away from what Allah had ordained?" 'Umar said, "Would that someone else
had said such a thing, O Abu 'Ubaida! Yes, we are running from what Allah
had ordained to what Allah has ordained. Don't you agree that if you had
camels that went down a valley having two places, one green and the other
dry, you would graze them on the green one only if Allah had ordained that,
and you would graze them on the dry one only if Allah had ordained that?"
At that time 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf, who had been absent because of
some job, came and said, "I have some knowledge about this. I have heard
Allah's Apostle saying, 'If you hear about it (an outbreak of plague) in a land,
do not go to it; but if plague breaks out in a country where you are staying,
do not run away from it.' " 'Umar thanked Allah and returned to Medina.

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 626:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amir
'Umar went to Sham and when h ached Sargh, he got the news that an
epidemic (of plague) had broken out in Sham. 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf told
him that Allah's Apostle said, "If you hear that it (plague) has broken out in a
land, do not go to it; but if it breaks out in a land where you are present, do
not go out escaping from it."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 627:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Neither Messiah (Ad-Dajjal) nor plague will enter
Medina."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 628:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "(Death from) plague is martyrdom for every Muslim."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 629:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "He (a Muslim) who dies of an abdominal disease is a a
martyr, and he who dies of plague is a martyr."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 630:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) that she asked Allah's Apostle about plague, and
Allah's Apostle informed her saying, "Plague was a punishment which Allah
used to send on whom He wished, but Allah made it a blessing for the
believers. None (among the believers) remains patient in a land in which
plague has broken out and considers that nothing will befall him except
what Allah has ordained for him, but that Allah will grant him a reward
similar to that of a martyr."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 631:
Narrated 'Aisha:
During the Prophet's fatal illness, he used to recite the Mu'auwidhat (Surat
An-Nas and Surat Al-Falaq) and then blow his breath over his body. When his
illness was aggravated, I used to recite those two Suras and blow my breath
over him and make him rub his body with his own hand for its blessings."
(Ma'mar asked Az-Zuhri: How did the Prophet use to blow? Az-Zuhri said: He
used to blow on his hands and then passed them over his face.)

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 632:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Some of the companions of the Prophet came across a tribe amongst the
tribes of the Arabs, and that tribe did not entertain them. While they were in
that state, the chief of that tribe was bitten by a snake (or stung by a
scorpion). They said, (to the companions of the Prophet ), "Have you got
any medicine with you or anybody who can treat with Ruqya?" The
Prophet's companions said, "You refuse to entertain us, so we will not treat
(your chief) unless you pay us for it." So they agreed to pay them a flock of
sheep. One of them (the Prophet's companions) started reciting Surat-alFatiha and gathering his saliva and spitting it (at the snake-bite). The patient
got cured and his people presented the sheep to them, but they said, "We
will not take it unless we ask the Prophet (whether it is lawful)." When they
asked him, he smiled and said, "How do you know that Surat-al-Fatiha is a
Ruqya? Take it (flock of sheep) and assign a share for me."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 633:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Some of the companions of the Prophet passed by some people staying at a
place where there was water, and one of those people had been stung by a
scorpion. A man from those staying near the water, came and said to the
companions of the Prophet, "Is there anyone among you who can do Ruqya
as near the water there is a person who has been stung by a scorpion." So
one of the Prophet's companions went to him and recited Surat-al-Fatiha for
a sheep as his fees. The patient got cured and the man brought the sheep to
his companions who disliked that and said, "You have taken wages for
reciting Allah's Book." When they arrived at Medina, they said, ' O Allah's
Apostle! (This person) has taken wages for reciting Allah's Book" On that
Allah's Apostle said, "You are most entitled to take wages for doing a Ruqya
with Allah's Book."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 634:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet ordered me or somebody else to do Ruqya (if there was
danger) from an evil eye.

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 635:
Narrated Um Salama:
that the Prophet saw in her house a girl whose face had a black spot. He
said. "She is under the effect of an evil eye; so treat her with a Ruqya."
Volume 7, Book 71, Number 636:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The effect of an evil eye is a fact." And he prohibited
tattooing

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 637:
Narrated Al-Aswad:
I asked 'Aisha about treating poisonous stings (a snake-bite or a scorpion
sting) with a Ruqya. She said, "The Prophet allowed the treatment of
poisonous sting with Ruqya."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 638:
Narrated 'Abdul 'Aziz:
Thabit and I went to Anas bin Malik. Thabit said, "O Abu Hamza! I am sick."
On that Anas said, "Shall I treat you with the Ruqya of Allah's Apostle?"
Thabit said, "Yes," Anas recited, "O Allah! The Lord of the people, the
Remover of trouble! (Please) cure (Heal) (this patient), for You are the
Healer. None brings about healing but You; a healing that will leave behind
no ailment."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 639:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to treat some of his wives by passing his right hand over
the place of ailment and used to say, "O Allah, the Lord of the people!
Remove the trouble and heal the patient, for You are the Healer. No healing
is of any avail but Yours; healing that will leave behind no ailment."
Volume 7, Book 71, Number 640:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle used to treat with a Ruqya saying, "O the Lord of the people!
Remove the trouble The cure is in Your Hands, and there is none except You
who can remove it (the disease) . "

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 641:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to say to the patient, "In the Name of Allah The earth of
our land and the saliva of some of us cure our patient."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 642:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle used to read in his Ruqya, "In the Name of Allah" The earth
of our land and the saliva of some of us cure our patient with the permission
of our Lord." with a slight shower of saliva) while treating with a Ruqya.

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 643:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
I heard the Prophet saying, "A good dream is from Allah, and a bad dream is
from Satan. So if anyone of you sees (in a dream) something he dislikes,
when he gets up he should blow thrice (on his left side) and seek refuge
with Allah from its evil for then it will not harm him."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 644:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Whenever Allah's Apostle went to bed, he used to recite Surat-al-Ikhlas,
Surat-al-Falaq and Surat-an-Nas and then blow on his palms and pass them
over his face and those parts of his body that his hands could reach. And
when he fell ill, he used to order me to do like that for him.

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 645:
Narrated Abu Said:
A group of the companions of Allah's Apostle proceeded on a journey till
they dismounted near one of the Arab tribes and requested them to
entertain them as their guests, but they (the tribe people) refused to
entertain them. Then the chief of that tribe was bitten by a snake (or stung
by a scorpion) and he was given all sorts of treatment, but all in vain. Some
of them said, "Will you go to the group (those travelers) who have
dismounted near you and see if one of them has something useful?" They
came to them and said, "O the group! Our leader has been bitten by a snake
(or stung by a scorpion) and we have treated him with everything but
nothing benefited him Has anyone of you anything useful?" One of them
replied, "Yes, by Allah, I know how to treat with a Ruqya. But. by Allah, we
wanted you to receive us as your guests but you refused. I will not treat your
patient with a Ruqya till you fix for us something as wages." Consequently
they agreed to give those travellers a flock of sheep. The man went with
them (the people of the tribe) and started spitting (on the bite) and reciting
Surat-al-Fatiha till the patient was healed and started walking as if he had
not been sick. When the tribe people paid them their wages they had agreed
upon, some of them (the Prophet's companions) said, "Distribute (the
sheep)." But the one who treated with the Ruqya said, "Do not do that till
we go to Allah's Apostle and mention to him what has happened, and see
what he will order us." So they came to Allah's Apostle and mentioned the
story to him and he said, "How do you know that Surat-al-Fatiha is a Ruqya?
You have done the right thing. Divide (what you have got) and assign for me
a share with you."
Volume 7, Book 71, Number 646:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to treat some of his wives by passing his right hand over
the place of ailment and used to say, "O Lord of the people! Remove the
difficulty and bring about healing as You are the Healer. There is no healing
but Your Healing, a healing that will leave no ailment."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 647:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet, during his fatal ailment used to blow (on his hands and pass
them) over his body while reciting the Mu'auwidhat (Surat-an-Nas and
Surat-al-Falaq). When his disease got aggravated, I used to recite them for
him and blow (on his hands) and let him pass his hands over his body
because of its blessing. (Ma'mar asked Ibn Shihab: How did he use to do
Nafth? He said: He used to blow on his hands and then pass them over his
face.)

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 648:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet once came out to us and said, "Some nations were displayed
before me. A prophet would pass in front of me with one man, and another
with two men, and another with a group of people. and another with
nobody with him. Then I saw a great crowd covering the horizon and I
wished that they were my followers, but it was said to me, 'This is Moses
and his followers.' Then it was said to me, 'Look'' I looked and saw a big
gathering with a large number of people covering the horizon. It was said,
"Look this way and that way.' So I saw a big crowd covering the horizon.
Then it was said to me, "These are your followers, and among them there
are 70,000 who will enter Paradise without (being asked about their)
accounts. " Then the people dispersed and the Prophet did not tell who
those 70,000 were. So the companions of the Prophet started talking about
that and some of them said, "As regards us, we were born in the era of
heathenism, but then we believed in Allah and His Apostle . We think
however, that these (70,000) are our offspring." That talk reached the
Prophet who said, "These (70,000) are the people who do not draw an evil
omen from (birds) and do not get treated by branding themselves and do
not treat with Ruqya, but put their trust (only) in their Lord." then 'Ukasha
bin Muhsin got up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Am I one of those (70,000)?"
The Prophet said, "Yes." Then another person got up and said, "Am I one of
them?" The Prophet said, " 'Ukasha has anticipated you."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 649:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "There is neither 'Adha (no contagious disease is
conveyed to others without Allah's permission) nor Tiyara, but an evil omen
may be in three a woman, a house or an animal."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 650:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "There is no Tiyara, and the best omen is the
Fal." They asked, "What is the Fal?" He said, "A good word that one of you
hears (and takes as a good omen)."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 651:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "There is no Tiyara and the best omen is the Fal,"
Somebody said, "What is the Fal, O Allah's Apostle?" He said, "A good word
that one of you hears (and takes as a good omen)."
Volume 7, Book 71, Number 652:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "No 'Adha (no contagious disease is conveyed to others
without Allah's permission), nor Tiyara, but I like the good Fal, i.e., the good
word."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 653:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "There is no 'Adha, nor Tiyara, nor Hama, nor Safar."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 654:
Narrated Abu Huraira :
Allah's Apostle gave his verdict about two ladies of the Hudhail tribe who
had fought each other and one of them had hit the other with a stone. The
stone hit her abdomen and as she was pregnant, the blow killed the child in
her womb. They both filed their case with the Prophet and he judged that
the blood money for what was in her womb. was a slave or a female slave.
The guardian of the lady who was fined said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall I be
fined for a creature that has neither drunk nor eaten, neither spoke nor
cried? A case like that should be nullified." On that the Prophet said, "This is
one of the brothers of soothsayers.

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 655:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Two ladies (had a fight) and one of them hit the other with a stone on the
abdomen and caused her to abort. The Prophet judged that the victim be
given either a slave or a female slave (as blood-money). Narrated Ibn Shihab:
Said bin Al-Musayyab said, "Allah's Apostle judged that in case of child killed
in the womb of its mother, the offender should give the mother a slave or a
female slave in recompense The offender said, How can I be fined for killing
one who neither ate nor drank, neither spoke nor cried: a case like that
should be denied ' On that Allah's Apostle said 'He is one of the brothers of
the foretellers

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 656:
Narrated Abu Mas'ud:
The Prophet forbade the utilization of the price of a dog, the earnings of
prostitute and the earnings of a foreteller

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 657:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Some people asked Allah's Apostle about the fore-tellers He said. ' They are
nothing" They said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Sometimes they tell us of a thing
which turns out to be true." Allah's Apostle said, "A Jinn snatches that true
word and pours it Into the ear of his friend (the fore-teller) (as one puts
something into a bottle) The foreteller then mixes with that word one
hundred lies."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 658:
Narrated 'Aisha:
A man called Labid bin al-A'sam from the tribe of Bani Zaraiq worked magic
on Allah's Apostle till Allah's Apostle started imagining that he had done a
thing that he had not really done. One day or one night he was with us, he
invoked Allah and invoked for a long period, and then said, "O 'Aisha! Do you
know that Allah has instructed me concerning the matter I have asked him
about? Two men came to me and one of them sat near my head and the
other near my feet. One of them said to his companion, "What is the disease
of this man?" The other replied, "He is under the effect of magic.' The first
one asked, 'Who has worked the magic on him?' The other replied, "Labid
bin Al-A'sam.' The first one asked, 'What material did he use?' The other
replied, 'A comb and the hairs stuck to it and the skin of pollen of a male
date palm.' The first one asked, 'Where is that?' The other replied, '(That is)
in the well of Dharwan;' " So Allah's Apostle along with some of his
companions went there and came back saying, "O 'Aisha, the color of its
water is like the infusion of Henna leaves. The tops of the date-palm trees
near it are like the heads of the devils." I asked. "O Allah's Apostle? Why did
you not show it (to the people)?" He said, "Since Allah cured me, I disliked to
let evil spread among the people." Then he ordered that the well be filled up
with earth.

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 659:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Avoid the Mubiqat, i.e., shirk and witchcraft."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 660:
Narrated Aisha:
Magic was worked on Allah's Apostle so that he used to think that he had
sexual relations with his wives while he actually had not (Sufyan said: That is
the hardest kind of magic as it has such an effect). Then one day he said, "O
'Aisha do you know that Allah has instructed me concerning the matter I
asked Him about? Two men came to me and one of them sat near my head
and the other sat near my feet. The one near my head asked the other. What
is wrong with this man?' The latter replied the is under the effect of magic
The first one asked, Who has worked magic on him?' The other replied Labid
bin Al-A'sam, a man from Bani Zuraiq who was an ally of the Jews and was a
hypocrite.' The first one asked, What material did he use)?' The other
replied, 'A comb and the hair stuck to it.' The first one asked, 'Where (is
that)?' The other replied. 'In a skin of pollen of a male date palm tree kept
under a stone in the well of Dharwan' '' So the Prophet went to that well
and took out those things and said "That was the well which was shown to
me (in a dream) Its water looked like the infusion of Henna leaves and its
date-palm trees looked like the heads of devils." The Prophet added, "Then
that thing was taken out' I said (to the Prophet ) "Why do you not treat
yourself with Nashra?" He said, "Allah has cured me; I dislike to let evil
spread among my people."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 661:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Magic was worked on Allah's Apostle so that he began to imagine that he
had done something although he had not. One day while he was with me, he
invoked Allah and invoked for a long period and then said, "O 'Aisha! Do you
know that Allah has instructed me regarding the matter I asked Him about?"
I asked, "What is that, O Allah's Apostle?" He said, "Two men came to me;
one of them sat near my head and the other sat near my feet. One of them
asked his companion, 'What is the disease of this man?' The other replied,
'He is under the effect of magic.' The first one asked, 'Who has worked
magic on him?" The other replied, 'Labid bin A'sam, a Jew from the tribe of
Bani Zuraiq.' The (first one asked), 'With what has it been done?' The other
replied, 'With a a comb and the hair stuck to it and a skin of the pollen of a
male datepalm tree.' The first one asked, 'Where is it?' The other replied, 'In
the well of Dharwan.' Then the Prophet went along with some of his
companions to that well and looked at that and there were date palms near
to it. Then he returned to me and said, 'By Allah the water of that well was
(red) like the infusion of Henna leaves and its date-palms were like the
heads of devils" I said, O Allah's Apostle! Did you take those materials out of
the pollen skin?" He said, 'No! As for me Allah has healed me and cured me
and I was afraid that (by Showing that to the people) I would spread evil
among them when he ordered that the well be filled up with earth, and it
was filled up with earth "
Volume 7, Book 71, Number 662:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
Two men came from the East and addressed the people who wondered at
their eloquent speeches On that Allah's Apostle said. Some eloquent speech
is as effective as magic.'

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 663:
Narrated Saud:
The Prophet said, "If somebody takes some 'Ajwa dates every morning, he
will not be effected by poison or magic on that day till night." (Another
narrator said seven dates).

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 664:
Narrated Saud:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "If Somebody takes seven 'Ajwa dates in the
morning, neither magic nor poison will hurt him that day."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 665o:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, 'No 'Adha (i.e. no contagious disease is conveyed to
others without Allah's permission); nor (any evil omen m the month of)
Safar; nor Hama" A bedouin said, "O Allah's Apostle! What about the camels
which, when on the sand (desert) look like deers, but when a mangy camel
mixes with them they all get infected with mange?" On that Allah s Apostle
said, "Then who conveyed the (mange) disease to the first (mangy)
camel?"
Volume 7, Book 71, Number 665e:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said: The cattle (sheep, cows, camels, etc.) suffering from a
disease should not be mixed up with healthy cattle, (or said: "Do not put a
patient with a healthy person ). " (as a precaution).

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 666:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "there is neither 'Adha nor Tiyara, and an evil omen is
only in three: a horse, a woman and a house." (See the foot-note of Hadith
No. 649)

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 667:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "No 'Adha." Abu Huraira also said: The Prophet said,
"The cattle suffering from a disease should not be mixed up with healthy
cattle (or said "Do not put a patient with a healthy person as a precaution.")
Abu Huraira also said: Allah's Apostle said, "No 'Adha." A bedouin got up
and said, "Don't you see how camels on the sand look like deer but when a
mangy camel mixes with them, they all get infected with mange?" On that
the Prophet said, "Then who conveyed the (mange) disease to the first
camel?"

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 668:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "No 'Adha nor Tiyara; but I like Fal." They said, "What is
the Fal?" He said, "A good word."
Volume 7, Book 71, Number 669:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
When Khaibar was conquered, Allah's Apostle was presented with a
poisoned (roasted) sheep. Allah's Apostle said, "Collect for me all the Jews
present in this area." (When they were gathered) Allah's Apostle said to
them, "I am going to ask you about something; will you tell me the truth?"
They replied, "Yes, O Abal-Qasim!" Allah's Apostle said to them, "Who is
your father?" They said, "Our father is so-and-so." Allah's Apostle said, "You
have told a lie. for your father is so-and-so," They said, "No doubt, you have
said the truth and done the correct thing." He again said to them, "If I ask
you about something; will you tell me the truth?" They replied, "Yes, O AbalQasim! And if we should tell a lie you will know it as you have known it
regarding our father," Allah's Apostle then asked, "Who are the people of
the (Hell) Fire?" They replied, "We will remain in the (Hell) Fire for a while
and then you (Muslims) will replace us in it" Allah's Apostle said to them.
''You will abide in it with ignominy. By Allah, we shall never replace you in it
at all." Then he asked them again, "If I ask you something, will you tell me
the truth?" They replied, "Yes." He asked. "Have you put the poison in this
roasted sheep?" They replied, "Yes," He asked, "What made you do that?"
They replied, "We intended to learn if you were a liar in which case we
would be relieved from you, and if you were a prophet then it would not
harm you."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 670:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Whoever purposely throws himself from a mountain and
kills himself, will be in the (Hell) Fire falling down into it and abiding therein
perpetually forever; and whoever drinks poison and kills himself with it, he
will be carrying his poison in his hand and drinking it in the (Hell) Fire
wherein he will abide eternally forever; and whoever kills himself with an
iron weapon, will be carrying that weapon in his hand and stabbing his
abdomen with it in the (Hell) Fire wherein he will abide eternally forever."
Volume 7, Book 71, Number 671:
Narrated Sad:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Whoever takes seven 'Ajwa dates in the
morning will not be effected by magic or poison on that day."

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 672:
Narrated Abu Tha'laba Al-Khushani:
The Prophet forbade the eating of wild animals having fangs. (Az-Zuhri said:
I did not hear this narration except when I went to Sham.) Al-Laith said:
Narrated Yunus: I asked Ibn Shihab, "May we perform the ablution with the
milk of she-asses or drink it, or drink the bile of wild animals or urine of
camels?" He replied, "The Muslims used to treat themselves with that and
did not see any harm in it. As for the milk of she-asses, we have learnt that
Allah's Apostle forbade the eating of their meat, but we have not received
any information whether drinking of their milk is allowed or forbidden." As
for the bile of wild animals, Ibn Shihab said, "Abu Idris Al-Khaulani told me
that Allah's Apostle forbade the eating of the flesh of every wild beast
having fangs . "

Volume 7, Book 71, Number 673:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If a fly falls in the vessel of any of you, let him dip all of
it (into the vessel) and then throw it away, for in one of its wings there is a
disease and in the other there is healing (antidote for it) i e. the treatment
for that disease."
BOOK 72. DRESS (674-852)
Volume 7, Book 72, Number 674:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, 'Allah will not look at the person who drags his garment
(behind him) out of conceit.''

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 675:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
The Prophet said Allah will not look, on the Day of Resurrection at the
person who drags his garment (behind him) out of conceit. On that Abu
Bakr said, "O Allah's Apostle! One side of my Izar hangs low if I do not take
care of it." The Prophet said, 'You are not one of those who do that out of
conceit."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 676:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
The solar eclipse occurred while we were sitting with the Prophet He got up
dragging his garment (on the ground) hurriedly till he reached the mosque
The people turned (to the mosque) and he offered a two-Rak'at prayer
whereupon the eclipse was over and he traced us and said, "The sun and the
moon are two signs among the signs of Allah, so if you see a thing like this
(eclipse) then offer the prayer and invoke Allah till He remove that state,"

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 677:
Narrated Abu Juhaifa:
I saw Bilal bringing an 'Anza (a small spear) and fixing it in the ground, and
then he proclaimed the Iqarna of the prayer, and I saw Allah's Apostle
coming out, wearing a cloak with its sleeves rolled up. He then offered a
two-Rak'at prayer while facing the 'Anza, and I saw the people and animals
passing in front of him beyond the 'Anza.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 678:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The part of an Izar which hangs below the ankles is in the
Fire."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 679:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle, "Allah will not look, on the Day of Resurrection, at a person
who drags his Izar (behind him) out of pride and arrogance

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 680:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet (or 'Abul Qasim) said, "While a man was walking, clad in a twopiece garment and proud of himself with his hair well-combed, suddenly
Allah made him sink into the earth and he will go on sinking into it till the
Day of Resurrection.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 681:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "While a man was dragging his Izar on the ground
(behind him), suddenly Allah made him sink into the earth and he will go on
sinking into it till the Day of Resurrection."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 682:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
that he heard the Prophet (narrating as above No. 680).

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 683:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever drags his clothes (on the ground) out of
pride and arrogance, Allah will not look at him on the Day of Resurrection."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 684:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet)
The wife of Rifa'a Al-Qurazi came to Allah's Apostle while I was sitting, and
Abu Bakr was also there. She said, 'O Allah s Apostle! I was the wife of Rifa'a
and he divorced me irrevocably. Then I married AbdurRahman bin Az-Zubair
who, by Allah, O Allah's Apostle, has only something like a fringe of a
garment, Showing the fringe of her veil. Khalid bin Sa'id, who was standing
at the door, for he had not been admitted, heard her statement and said, "O
Abu Bakr! Why do you not stop this lady from saying such things openly
before Allah's Apostle?" No, by Allah, Allah's Apostle did nothing but smiled.
Then he said to the lady, "Perhaps you want to return to Rifa'a? That is
impossible unless 'Abdur-Rahman consummates his marriage with you."
That became the tradition after him.
Volume 7, Book 72, Number 685:
Narrated 'Ali:
The Prophet asked for his Rida, put it on and set out walking. Zaid bin
Haritha and I followed him till he reached the house where Harnza (bin
'Abdul Muttalib) was present and asked for permission to enter, and they
gave us permission.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 686:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
A man asked, "O Allah s Apostle What kind of clothes should a Muhrim
wear?" The Prophet, said, "A Muhrim should not wear a shirt, trousers a
hooded cloak, or Khuffs (leather socks covering the ankles) unless he
cannot get sandals, in which case he should cut the part (of the Khuff) that
covers the ankles."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 687:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
The Prophet came to visit Abdullah bin Ubai (bin Salul) after he had been put
in his grave. The Prophet ordered that 'Abdullah be taken out. He was taken
out and was placed on the knees on the knees of the Prophet, who blew his
(blessed) breath on him and dressed the body with his own shirt. And Allah
knows better.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 688:
Narrated Abdullah bin 'Umar:
When Abdullah bin Ubdi (bin Salul) died, his son came to Allah's Apostle and
said ' O Allah's Apostle, give me your shirt so that I may shroud my fathers
body in it. And please offer a funeral prayer for him and invoke Allah for his
forgiveness." The Prophet gave him his shirt and said to him 'Inform us
when you finish (and the funeral procession is ready) call us. When he had
finished he told the Prophet and the Prophet proceeded to order his funeral
prayers but Umar stopped him and said, "Didn't Allah forbid you to offer the
funeral prayer for the hypocrites when He said: "Whether you (O
Muhammad) ask forgiveness for them or ask not forgiveness for them: (and
even) if you ask forgiveness for them seventy times. Allah will not forgive
them." (9.80) Then there was revealed: "And never (O Muhammad) pray for
any of them that dies, nor stand at his grave." (9.34) Thenceforth the
Prophet did not offer funeral prayers for the hypocrites.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 689:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle has set forth an example for a miser and a charitable person
by comparing them to two men wearing two iron cloaks and their hands are
raised to their breasts and necks. Whenever the charitable man tries to give
a charitable gift, his iron cloak expands till it becomes so wide that it will
cover his fingertips and obliterate his tracks And, whenever the miser wants
to give a charitable gift, his cloak becomes very tight over him and every ring
gets stuck to its place Abu Huraira added; I saw Allah's Apostle putting his
finger in the (chest) pocket of his shirt like that If you but saw him trying to
widen (the opening of his shirt) but it did not widen

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 690:
Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba:
The Prophet went to answer the call of nature, and when he returned, I met
him with water and he performed the ablution while he was wearing a
Sham, cloak. He rinsed his mouth, put the water in his nose and blew it out,
washed his face and tried to take his hands out of his sleeves, but they were
too narrow, so he took out his hands from under his chest and washed them
and then passed his wet hands over his head and Khuffs (leather socks) .
Volume 7, Book 72, Number 691:
Narrated Al-Mughira:
One night I was with the Prophet on a journey. He asked (me), "Have you
got water with you?" I replied, "Yes" So he got down from his she-camel and
went away till he disappeared in the darkness of the night. Then he came
back and I poured water for him from the pot (for the ablution). He washed
his face and hands while he was wearing a woollen cloak (the sleeves of
which were narrow), so he could not take his arms out of it. So he took them
out from underneath the cloak. Then he washed his forearms and passed his
wet hands over his head. Then I tried to take off his Khuffs, but he said,
"Leave them, for I have performed ablution before putting them on." And
so he passed his wet hands over them

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 692:
Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:
Allah's Apostle distributed some Qaba's but he did not give anything to
Makhrama. Makhrama said (to me), "O my son! Let us go to Allah's
Apostle." So I proceeded with him and he said, "Go in and call him 'or me."
So I called the Prophet for him The Prophet came out to him, wearing one of
those Qaba's and said, (to Makhrama), "I have kept this for you " Makhrama
looked at it and said, "Makhrama is satisfied now"

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 693:
Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir:
A silken Farruj was presented to Allah's Apostle and he put it on and offered
the prayer in it. When he finished the prayer, he took it off violently as if he
disliked it and said, "This (garment) does not befit those who fear Allah!"
Volume 7, Book 72, Number 694:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
A man said, "O Allah's Apostle. What type of clothes should a Muhrim wear
Allah's Apostle replied, 'Do not wear shirts, turbans trousers hooded cloaks
or Khuffs; but if someone cannot get sandals, then he can wear Khuffs after
cutting them short below the ankles. Do not wear clothes touched by saffon
or wars (two kinds of perfumes) "

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 695:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "Whoever cannot get an Izar, can wear trousers, and
whoever cannot wear sandals can wear Khuffs."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 696:
Narrated Abdullah:
A man got up and said, O Allah's Apostle! What do you order us to wear
when we assume the state of Ihram?" The Prophet replied, "Do not wear
shirts, trousers, turbans, hooded cloaks or Khuffs, but if a man has no
sandals, he can wear Khuffs after cutting them short below the ankles; and
do not wear clothes touched with (perfumes) of saffron or wars."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 697:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "A Muhrim should not wear a shirt, a turban, trousers,
hooded cloaks, a garment touched with (perfumes) of saffron or wars, or
Khuffs except if one has no sandals in which case he should cut short the
Khuffs below the ankles."
Volume 7, Book 72, Number 698:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Some Muslim men emigrated to Ethiopia whereupon Abu Bakr also
prepared himself for the emigration, but the Prophet said (to him), "Wait,
for I hope that Allah will allow me also to emigrate." Abu Bakr said, "Let my
father and mother be sacrificed for you. Do you hope that (emigration)?"
The Prophet said, 'Yes." So Abu Bakr waited to accompany the Prophet and
fed two she-camels he had on the leaves of As-Samur tree regularly for four
months One day while we were sitting in our house at midday, someone said
to Abu Bakr, "Here is Allah's Apostle, coming with his head and a part of his
face covered with a cloth-covering at an hour he never used to come to us."
Abu Bakr said, "Let my father and mother be sacrificed for you, (O Prophet)!
An urgent matter must have brought you here at this hour." The Prophet
came and asked the permission to enter, and he was allowed. The Prophet
entered and said to Abu Bakr, "Let those who are with you, go out." Abu
Bakr replied, "(There is no stranger); they are your family. Let my father be
sacrificed for you, O Allah's Apostle!" The Prophet said, "I have been
allowed to leave (Mecca)." Abu Bakr said, " I shall accompany you, O Allah's
Apostles, Let my father be sacrificed for you!" The Prophet said, "Yes," Abu
Bakr said, 'O Allah's Apostles! Let my father be sacrificed for you. Take one
of these two she-camels of mine" The Prophet said. I will take it only after
paying its price." So we prepared their baggage and put their journey food
In a leather bag. And Asma' bint Abu Bakr cut a piece of her girdle and tied
the mouth of the leather bag with it. That is why she was called Dhat-anNitaqaln. Then the Prophet and Abu Bakr went to a cave in a mountain
called Thour and remained there for three nights. 'Abdullah bin Abu Bakr.
who was a young intelligent man. used to stay with them at night and leave
before dawn so that in the morning, he would he with the Quraish at Mecca
as if he had spent the night among them. If he heard of any plot contrived
by the Quraish against the Prophet and Abu Bakr, he would understand it
and (return to) inform them of it when it became dark. 'Amir bin Fuhaira, the
freed slave of Abu Bakr used to graze a flock of milch sheep for them and he
used to take those sheep to them when an hour had passed after the 'Isha
prayer. They would sleep soundly till 'Amir bin Fuhaira awakened them
when it was still dark. He used to do that in each of those three nights.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 699:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
In the year of the conquest of Mecca the Prophet entered Mecca, wearing a
helmet on his head.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 700:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Once I was walking with Allah's Apostle and he was wearing a Najram Burd
with thick margin. A bedouin followed him and pulled his Burd so violently
that I noticed the side of the shoulder of Allah's Apostle affected by the
margin of the Burd because of that violent pull. The Bedouin said, "O
Muhammad! Give me some of Allah's wealth which is with you." Allah's
Apostle turned and looked at him, and smiling, 'he ordered that he be given
something.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 701:
Narrated Abu Hazim:
Shahl bin Sad said, "A lady came with a Burda. Sahl then asked (the people),
"Do you know what Burda is?" Somebody said, "Yes. it is a Shamla with a
woven border." Sahl added, "The lady said, 'O Allah's Apostle! I have knitted
this (Burda) with my own hands for you to wear it." Allah's Apostle took it
and he was in need of it. Allah's Apostle came out to us and he was wearing
it as an Izar. A man from the people felt it and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Give it
to me to wear.' The Prophet s said, 'Yes.' Then he sat there for some time
(and when he went to his house), he folded it and sent it to him. The people
said to that man, 'You have not done a right thing. You asked him for it,
though you know that he does not put down anybody's request.' The man
said, 'By Allah! I have only asked him so that it may be my shroud when I
die." Sahl added, "Late it was his shroud."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 702:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying "From among my followers, a group (o
70,000) will enter Paradise without being asked for their accounts, Their
faces will be shining like the moon." 'Ukasha bin Muhsin Al-Asadi got up,
lifting his covering sheet and said, "O Allah's Apostle Invoke Allah for me
that He may include me with them." The Prophet said! "O Allah! Make him
from them." Then another man from Al-Ansar got up and said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Invoke Allah for me that He may include me with them." On that
Allah's Apostle said, "'Ukasha has anticipated you."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 703:
Narrated Qatada:
I asked Anas, "What kind of clothes was most beloved to the Prophet?" He
replied, "The Hibra (a kind of Yemenese cloth)."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 704:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The most beloved garment to the Prophet to wear was the Hibra (a kind of
Yemenese cloth).

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 705:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) When Allah's Apostle died, he was covered with a
Hibra Burd (green square decorated garment).

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 706:
Narrated 'Aisha and 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
When the disease of Allah's Apostle got aggravated, he covered his face
with a Khamisa, but when he became short of breath, he would remove it
from his face and say, "It is like that! May Allah curse the Jews Christians
because they took the graves of their prophets as places of worship." By
that he warned his follower of imitating them, by doing that which they did.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 707:
Narrated Abu Burda:
Aisha brought out to us a Kisa and an Izar and said, "The Prophet died while
wearing these two." (Kisa, a square black piece of woolen cloth. Izar, a
sheet cloth garment covering the lower half of the body).

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 708:
Narrated Aisha:
Allah's Apostle offered prayer while he was wearing a Khamisa of his that
had printed marks. He looked at its marks and when he finished prayer, he
said, "Take this Khamisa of mine to Abu Jahm, for it has just now diverted
my attention from my prayer, and bring to me the Anbijania (a plain thick
sheet) of Abu Jahm bin Hudhaifa bin Ghanim who belonged to Bani Adi bin
Ka'b."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 709:
Narrated Abu Huraira
The Prophet had forbidden: (A) the Mulamasa and Munabadha (bargains),
(B) the offering of two prayers, one after the morning compulsory prayer till
the sun rises, and the others, after the 'Asr prayer till the sun sets (C) He also
forbade that one should sit wearing one garment, nothing of which covers
his private parts (D) and prevent them from exposure to the sky; (E) he also
forbade Ishtimal-as-Samma'.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 710:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri
Allah's Apostle forbade two ways of wearing clothes and two kinds of
dealings. (A) He forbade the dealings of the Mulamasa and the Munabadha.
In the Mulamasa transaction the buyer just touches the garment he wants
to buy at night or by daytime, and that touch would oblige him to buy it. In
the Munabadha, one man throws his garment at another and the latter
throws his at the former and the barter is complete and valid without
examining the two objects or being satisfied with them (B) The two ways of
wearing clothes were Ishtimal-as-Samma, i e., to cover one's shoulder with
one's garment and leave the other bare: and the other way was to wrap
oneself with a garment while one was sitting In such a way that nothing of
that garment would cover one's private part

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 711:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle forbade two types of dresses: (A) To sit in an Ihtiba' posture
in one garment nothing of which covers his private parts. (B) to cover one
side of his body with one garment and leave the other side bare The Prophet
also forbade the Mulamasa and Munabadha.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 712:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The Prophet forbade Ishtimal-as-Samma' and that a man should sit in an
Ihtiba' posture in one garment, nothing of which covers his private parts.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 713:
Narrated Um Khalid bint Khalid:
The Prophet was given some clothes including a black Khamisa. The Prophet
said, "To whom shall we give this to wear?" The people kept silent
whereupon the Prophet said, "Fetch Um Khalid for me." I (Um Khalid) was
brought carried (as I was small girl at that time). The Prophet took the
Khamisa in his hands and made me wear it and said, "May you live so long
that your dress will wear out and you will mend it many times." On the
Khamisa there were some green or pale designs (The Prophet saw these
designs) and said, "O Um Khalid! This is Sanah." (Sanah in a Ethiopian word
meaning beautiful).

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 714:
Narrated Anas:
When Um Sulaim gave birth to a child. she said to me, "O Anas! Watch this
boy carefully and do not give him anything to eat or drink until you have
taken him to the Prophet tomorrow morning for the Tahnik." So the next
morning I took the child to the Prophet who was sitting in a garden and was
wearing a Huraithiya Khamisa and was branding the she-camel on which he
had come during the Conquest of Mecca.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 715:
Narrated 'Ikrima:
Rifa'a divorced his wife whereupon 'AbdurRahman bin Az-Zubair Al-Qurazi
married her. 'Aisha said that the lady (came), wearing a green veil (and
complained to her (Aisha) of her husband and showed her a green spot on
her skin caused by beating). It was the habit of ladies to support each other,
so when Allah's Apostle came, 'Aisha said, "I have not seen any woman
suffering as much as the believing women. Look! Her skin is greener than
her clothes!" When 'AbdurRahman heard that his wife had gone to the
Prophet, he came with his two sons from another wife. She said, "By Allah! I
have done no wrong to him but he is impotent and is as useless to me as
this," holding and showing the fringe of her garment, 'Abdur-Rahman said,
"By Allah, O Allah's Apostle! She has told a lie! I am very strong and can
satisfy her but she is disobedient and wants to go back to Rifa'a." Allah's
Apostle said, to her, "If that is your intention, then know that it is unlawful
for you to remarry Rifa'a unless Abdur-Rahman has had sexual intercourse
with you." Then the Prophet saw two boys with 'Abdur-Rahman and asked
(him), "Are these your sons?" On that 'AbdurRahman said, "Yes." The
Prophet said, "You claim what you claim (i.e.. that he is impotent)? But by
Allah, these boys resemble him as a crow resembles a crow,"

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 716:
Narrated Sad:
On the day of the battle of Uhud, on the right and on the left of the Prophet
were two men wearing white clothes, and I had neither seen them before,
nor did I see them afterwards.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 717:
Narrated Abu Dharr:
I came to the Prophet while he was wearing white clothes and sleeping.
Then I went back to him again after he had got up from his sleep. He said,
"Nobody says: 'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah' and then
later on he dies while believing in that, except that he will enter Paradise.' I
said, "Even It he had committed illegal sexual intercourse and theft." I said.
"Even if he had committed illegal sexual intercourse and theft? He said.
'Even If he had committed illegal sexual intercourse and theft," I said, 'Even
it he had committed illegal sexual intercourse and thefts.' He said, "Even If
he had committed Illegal sexual intercourse and theft, inspite of the Abu
Dharrs dislikeness. Abu 'Abdullah said, "This is at the time of death or before
it if one repents and regrets and says "None has the right to be worshipped
but Allah. He will be forgiven his sins."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 718:
Narrated Aba 'Uthman An-Nahdi:
While we were with 'Utba bin Farqad at Adharbijan, there came 'Umar's
letter indicating that Allah's Apostle had forbidden the use of silk except this
much, then he pointed with his index and middle fingers. To our knowledge,
by that he meant embroidery.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 719:
Narrated Abu 'Uthman:
While we were at Adharbijan, 'Umar wrote to us: 'Allah's Apostle forbade
wearing silk except this much. Then the Prophet approximated his two
fingers (index and middle fingers) (to illustrate that) to us.' Zuhair (the subnarrator) raised up his middle and index fingers.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 720:
Narrated Abu 'Uthman:
While we were with 'Utba. 'Umar wrote to us: The Prophet said, "There is
none who wears silk in this world except that he will wear nothing of it in
the Hereafter." ' Abu 'Uthman pointed out with his middle and index fingers.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 721:
Narrated Abu Uthman
(as above, 719)

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 722:
Narrated Ibn Abi Laila:
While Hudhaifa was at Al-Madain, he asked for water whereupon the chief
of the village brought him water in a silver cup. Hudhaifa threw it at him and
said, "I have thrown it only because I have forbidden him to use it, but he
does not stop using it. Allah's Apostle said, 'Gold, silver, silk and Dibaj (a kind
of silk) are for them (unbelievers) in this world and for you (Muslims) in the
hereafter.'

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 723:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, Whoever wears silk in this world shall not wear it in the
Hereafter."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 724:
Narrated Thabit:
I heard Ibn Az-Zubair delivering a sermon, saying, "Muhammad said,
'Whoever wears silk in this world, shall not wear it in the Hereafter."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 725:
Narrated Ibn Az-Zubair:
I heard 'Umar saying, "The Prophet said, 'Whoever wears silk in this world,
shall not wear it in the Hereafter."
Volume 7, Book 72, Number 726:
Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:
Allah's Apostle said, "None wears silk in this world, but he who will have no
share in the Hereafter."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 727:
Narrated Al-Bara:
The Prophet was given a silk garment as a gift and we started touching it
with our hands and admiring it. On that the Prophet said, "Do you wonder at
this?" We said, "Yes." He said, "The handkerchiefs of Sad bin Mu'adh in
Paradise are better than this "

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 728:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
The Prophet forbade us to drink out of gold and silver vessels, or eat in it,
Ann also forbade the wearing of silk and Dibaj or sitting on it.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 729:
Narrated Ibn Azib:
The Prophet forbade us to use the red Mayathir and to use Al-Qassiy

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 730:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet allowed Az-Zubair and 'Abdur-Rahman to wear silk because
they were suffering from an itch
Volume 7, Book 72, Number 731:
Narrated Ali bin Abi Talib:
The Prophet gave me a silk suit. I went out wearing it, but seeing the signs
of anger on his face, I tore it and distributed it among my wives.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 732:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
'Umar saw a silk suit being sold, so he said, "O Allah's Apostle! Why don't
you buy it so that you may wear it when delegates come to you, and also on
Fridays?" The Prophet said, "This is worn only by him who has no share in
the Hereafter." Afterwards the Prophet sent to 'Umar a silk suit suitable for
wearing. 'Umar said to the Prophet, "You have given it to me to wear, yet I
have heard you saying about it what you said?" The Prophet said, "I sent it to
you so that you might either sell it or give it to somebody else to wear."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 733:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
that he had seen Um Kulthum, the daughter of Allah's Apostle , wearing a
red silk garment.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 734:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
For one year I wanted to ask 'Umar about the two women who helped each
other against the Prophet but I was afraid of him. One day he dismounted
his riding animal and went among the trees of Arak to answer the call of
nature, and when he returned, I asked him and he said, "(They were) 'Aisha
and Hafsa." Then he added, "We never used to give significance to ladies i
the days of the Pre-lslamic period of ignorance, but when Islam came and
Allah mentioned their rights, we used to give them their rights but did not
allow them to interfere in our affairs. Once there was some dispute between
me and my wife and she answered me back in a loud voice. I said to her,
'Strange! You can retort in this way?' She said, 'Yes. Do you say this to me
while your daughter troubles Allah's Apostle?' So I went to Hafsa and said to
her, 'I warn you not to disobey Allah and His Apostle.' I first went to Hafsa
and then to Um Salama and told her the same. She said to me, 'O 'Umar! It
surprises me that you interfere in our affairs so much that you would poke
your nose even into the affairs of Allah's Apostle and his wives.' So she
rejected my advice. There was an Ansari man; whenever he was absent from
Allah's Apostle and I was present there, I used to convey to him what had
happened (on that day), and when I was absent and he was present there,
he used to convey to me what had happened as regards news from Allah's
Apostle . During that time all the rulers of the nearby lands had surrendered
to Allah's Apostle except the king of Ghassan in Sham, and we were afraid
that he might attack us. All of a sudden the Ansari came and said, 'A great
event has happened!' I asked him, 'What is it? Has the Ghassani (king)
come?' He said, 'Greater than that! Allah's Apostle has divorced his wives! I
went to them and found all of them weeping in their dwellings, and the
Prophet had ascended to an upper room of his. At the door of the room
there was a slave to whom I went and said, "Ask the permission for me to
enter." He admitted me and I entered to see the Prophet lying on a mat that
had left its imprint on his side. Under his head there was a leather pillow
stuffed with palm fires. Behold! There were some hides hanging there and
some grass for tanning. Then I mentioned what I had said to Hafsa and Um
Salama and what reply Um Salama had given me. Allah's Apostle smiled and
stayed there for twenty nine days and then came down." (See Hadith No.
648, Vol. 3 for details)

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 735:
Narrated Um Salama:
One night the Prophet woke up, saying, "None has the right to be
worshipped but Allah! How many afflictions have been sent down tonight,
and how many treasures have been sent down (disclosed)! Who will go and
wake up (for prayers) the lady dwellers of these rooms? Many well dressed
soul (people) in this world, will be naked on the Day of Resurrection."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 736:
Narrated Um Khalid bint Khalid:
Some clothes were presented to Allah's Apostle as a gift and there was a
black Khamisa with it. The Prophet asked (his companions), "To whom do
you suggest we give this Khamisa?" The people kept quiet. Then he said,
"Bring me Um Khalid," So I was brought to him and he dressed me with it
with his own hands and said twice, "May you live so long that you will wear
out many garments." He then started looking at the embroidery of that
Khamisa and said, "O Um Khalid! This is Sana!" (Sana in Ethiopian language
means beautiful.) Ishaq, a sub-narrator, said: A woman of my family had told
me that she had seen the Khamisa worn by Um Khalid.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 737:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet forbade men to use saffron.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 738:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet forbade Muhrims to wear clothes dyed with Wars or saffron.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 739:
Narrated Al-Bara
The Prophet was of a modest height. I saw him wearing a red suit, and I did
not see anything better than him.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 740:
Narrated Al-Bara:
The Prophet ordered us to observe seven things: To visit the sick; follow
funeral processions; say 'May Allah bestow His Mercy on you', to the
sneezer if he says, 'Praise be to Allah!; He forbade us to wear silk, Dibaj,
Qassiy and Istibarq (various kinds of silken clothes); or to use red Mayathir
(silk-cushions). (See Hadith No. 253 A, Vol. 8).

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 741:
Narrated Said Abu Maslama:
I asked Anas (bin Malik), "Did the Prophet use to offer the prayers with his
shoes on?" He said, "Yes."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 742:
Narrated Said Al-Maqburi:
'Ubai bin Juraij said to 'Abdullah Ben 'Umar, "I see you doing four things
which are not done by your friends." Ibn 'Umar said, "What are they, O Ibn
Juraij?" He said, "I see that you do not touch except the two Yemenite
corners of the Ka'ba (while performing the Tawaf): and I see you wearing
the Sabtiyya shoes; and I see you dyeing (your hair) with Sufra; and I see
that when you are in Mecca, the people assume the state of Ihram on seeing
the crescent (on the first day of Dhul-Hijja) while you do not assume the
state of Ihram till the Day of Tarwiya (8th Dhul Hijja)." 'Abdullah bin 'Umar
said to him, "As for the corners of the Ka'ba, I have not seen Allah's Apostle
touching except the two Yemenite corners, As for the Sabtiyya shoes, I saw
Allah's Apostle wearing leather shoes that had no hair, and he used to
perform the ablution while wearing them. Therefore, I like to wear such
shoes. As regards dyeing with Sufra, I saw Allah's Apostle dyeing his hair
with it, so I like to dye (my hair) with it. As regards the crescent (of DhulHijja), I have not seen Allah's Apostle assuming the state of Ihram till his shecamel set out (on the 8th of Dhul-Hijja)."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 743:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle forbade that a Muhrim should wear clothes dyed with
Saffron or Wars, and said, "Whoever has no shoes can put on Khuffs after
cutting it below the ankles."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 744:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet said, "Whoever has no Izar (waist sheet), can wear trousers;
and whoever has no sandals, can wear Khuffs." (but cut them short below
the ankles),

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 745:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to like starting from the right in performing ablution,
combing his hair and putting on his shoes.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 746:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "None of you should walk, wearing one shoe only; he
should either put on both shoes or put on no shoes whatsoever."
Volume 7, Book 72, Number 747:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If you want to put on your shoes, put on the right shoe
first; and if you want to take them off, take the left one first. Let the right
shoe be the first to be put on and the last to be taken off."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 748:
Narrated Anas:
The sandal of the Prophet had two straps.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 749:
Narrated Isaa bin Tahman:
Anas bin Malik brought out for us, two sandals having two straps. Thabit AlBanani said, "These were the sandals of the Prophet ."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 750:
Narrated Abu Juhaifa:
I came to the Prophet while he was inside a red leather tent, and I saw Bilal
taking the remaining water of the ablution of the Prophet, and the people
were taking of that water and rubbing it on their faces; and whoever could
not get anything of it, would share the moisture of the hand of his
companion (and then rub it on his face).

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 751:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet called for the Ansar and gathered them in a leather tent.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 752:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to construct a loom with a Hasir at night m order to pray
therein, and during the day he used to spread it out and sit on it. The people
started coming to the Prophet at night to offer the prayer behind him When
their number increased, the Prophet faced them and said. O people! Do only
those good deeds which you can do, for Allah does not get tired (of giving
reward) till you get tired, and the best deeds to Allah are the incessant ones
though they were few

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 753:
Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib:
The Prophet forbade us to use seven things: He forbade using gold rings,
silk, Istabraq, Dibaj, red Mayathir, Al-Qassiy, and silver utensils. He ordered
us to do seven other things. To pay a visit to the sick; to follow funeral
processions; to say, "May Allah be merciful to you" to a sneezer if he says
"Praise be to Allah"; to return greetings, to accept invitations; to help others
to fulfil their oaths and to help the oppressed ones.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 754:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet forbade the wearing of a gold ring.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 755:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle wore a gold or silver .. ring and placed its stone towards the
palm of his hand. The people also started wearing gold rings like it, but
when the Prophet saw them wearing such rings, he threw away that golden
ring and then wore a silver ring.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 756:
Narrated Ibn. 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle wore a gold ring or a silver ring and placed its stone towards
the palm of his hand and had the name 'Muhammad, the Apostle of Allah'
engraved on it. The people also started wearing gold rings like it, but when
the Prophet saw them wearing such rings, he threw away his own ring and
said. "I will never wear it," and then wore a silver ring, whereupon the
people too started wearing silver rings. Ibn Umar added: After the Prophet
Abu Bakr wore the ring, and then Umar and then 'Uthman wore it till it fell in
the Aris well from 'Uthman. bin 'Umar : Allah's Apostle wore a gold ring,
then he threw it and said, "I will never wear it." The people also threw their
(gold) rings.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 757:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
that he saw a silver ring on the hand of Allah's Apostle for one day only.
Then the people had silver rings made for themselves and wore it. On that,
Allah's Apostle threw away their rings as well. (For the details of this Hadith,
see Fateh-Al-Bari, Vol. 12, page 438).

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 758:
Narrated Humaid:
Anas was asked, "Did the Prophet wear a ring?" Anas said, "Once he delayed
the: 'Isha' prayer till midnight. Then he came, facing us ..... as if l am now
Looking at the glitter of his ring ..... and said, "The people have offered their
prayers and slept but you have been in prayer as you have been waiting for
it."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 759:
Narrated Anas:
The ring of the Prophet was of silver, and its stone was of silver too.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 760:
Narrated Sahl:
A woman came to the Prophet and said, "I have come to present myself to
you (for marriage)." She kept standing for a long period during which period
the Prophet looked at her carefully. When she stayed for a Long period, a
man said to the Prophet "If you are not in need of her, then marry her to
me." The Prophet said, "Have you got anything to give her (as Mahr)?" The
man said, "No." The Prophet said, "Go (to your house) and search for
something." The man went and came back to say, "By Allah, I could not find
anything." The Prophet said, "Go again and search for something, even if it
be an iron ring." He went again and came back saying, "No, by Allah, I could
not get even an iron ring." The man had only an Izar and had no Rida' (upper
garment). He said, "I will give her my Izar as Mahr." On that the Prophet
said, "Your Izar? If she wears it, nothing of it will remain on you, and if you
wear it nothing of it will be on her" The man went aside and sat down When
the Prophet saw him leaving (after a while), he called back and asked. "How
much Qur'an do you know (by heart)? He said, 'I know such and such Suras,"
naming some Suras. The Prophet said, "I marry her to you for the amount of
Qur'an you know (by heart)."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 761:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle wanted to write a letter to a group of people or some nonArabs. It was said to him, "They do not accept any letter unless it is
stamped." So the Prophet had a silver ring made for himself, and on it was
engraved: 'Muhammad, the Apostle of Allah'. .. as if I am now looking at the
glitter of the ring on the finger (or in the palm) of the Prophet .

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 762:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle had a silver ring made for himself and it was worn by him on
his hand. Afterwards it was worn by Abu Bakr, and then by 'Umar, and then
by 'Uthman till it fell in the Aris well. (On that ring) was engraved:
'Muhammad, the Apostle of Allah."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 763:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet got a ring made for himself and said, "I have got a ring made
(for myself) and engraved a certain engraving on it so none of you should
get such an engraving on his ring." I saw the glitter of the ring on his little
finger.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 764:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
When the Prophet intended to write to the Byzantines, it was said to him,
"Those people do not read your letter unless it is stamped." So the Prophet
took a silver ring and got 'Muhammad, the Apostle of Allah' engraved on it
.... as if I am now looking at its glitter in his hand.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 765:
Narrated Abdullah:
The Prophet had a golden ring made for himself, and when he wore it. he
used to turn its stone toward the palm of his! hand. So the people too had
gold made for themselves. The Prophet then ascended the pulpit, and after
glorifying and praising Allah, he said, "I had it made for me, but now I will
never wear it again." He threw it away, and then the people threw away
their rings too. (Juwairiya, a sub-narrator, said: I think Anas said that the
Prophet was wearing the ring in his right hand.)

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 766:
Narrated Anas bin Malik :
Allah's Apostle took a silver ring and had 'Muhammad, the Apostle' of Allah'
engraved on it. The Prophet then said (to us), 'I have a silver ring with
'Muhammad, the Apostle of Allah engraved on it, so none of you should
have the same engraving on his ring."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 767:
Narrated Anas:
that when Abu Bakr became the Caliph, he wrote a letter to him (and
stamped it with the Prophet's ring) and the engraving of the ring was in
three lines: Muhammad in one line, 'Apostle' in another line, and 'Allah' in a
third line. Anas added: 'the ring of the Prophet was in his hand, and after
him, in Abu Bakr's hand, and then in 'Umar's hand after Abu Bakr. When
Uthman was the Caliph, once he was sitting at the well of Aris. He removed
the ring from his hand and while he was trifling with it, dropped into the
well. We kept on going to the well with Uthman for three days looking for
the ring, and finally the well was drained, but the ring was not found.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 768:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
I offered the 'Id prayer with the Prophet and he offered prayer before the
Khutba (sermon). ibn 'Abbas added: After the prayer the Prophet came
towards (the rows of) the women and ordered them to give alms, and the
women started putting their big and small rings in the garment of Bilal.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 769:
Narrated ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet came out on the day of 'Id and offered a two-Rak'at prayer, and
he did not pray any Rak'a before it, nor after it. Then he went towards the
women and ordered them to give alms. The women started donating their
earring and necklaces.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 770:
Narrated 'Aisha:
A necklace belonging to Asma' was lost, and the Prophet sent men in its
search. The time for the prayer became due and they were without ablution
and they could not find water; therefore they prayed without ablution, They
mentioned that to the Prophet . Then Allah revealed the Verse of
Tayammum. ('Aisha added: that she had borrowed (the necklace) from
Asma').

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 771:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas
"The Prophet offered a two-Rak'at prayer on 'Id day and he did not offer any
(Nawafil prayer) before or after it. He then went towards the women, and
Bilal was accompanying him, and ordered them to give alms. And so the
women started giving their earrings (etc .)."
Volume 7, Book 72, Number 772:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I was with Allah's Apostle in one of the Markets of Medina. He left (the
market) and so did I. Then he asked thrice, "Where is the small (child)?" Then
he said, "Call Al-Hasan bin 'Ali." So Al-Hasan bin 'Ali got up and started
walking with a necklace (of beads) around his neck. The Prophet stretched
his hand out like this, and Al-Hasan did the same. The Prophet embraced him
and said, "0 Allah! l love him, so please love him and love those who love
him." Since Allah's Apostle said that. nothing has been dearer to me than AlHasan.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 773:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle cursed those men who are in the similitude (assume the
manners) of women and those women who are in the similitude (assume
the manners) of men.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 774:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet cursed effeminate men (those men who are in the similitude
(assume the manners of women) and those women who assume the
manners of men, and he said, "Turn them out of your houses ." The Prophet
turned out such-and-such man, and 'Umar turned out such-and-such
woman.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 775:
Narrated Um Salama:
that once the Prophet was in her house, and an effeminate man was there
too. The effeminate man said to 'Abdullah, (Um Salama's brother) "0
'Abdullah! If Ta'if should be conquered tomorrow, I recommend you the
daughter of Ghailan, for she is so fat that she has four curves in the front (of
her belly) and eight at the back." So the Prophet said (to his wives) "These
effeminate (men) should not enter upon you (your houses).

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 776:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
The Prophet said, "To get the moustaches cut 'short is characteristic of the
Fitra."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 777:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Five practices are characteristics of the Fitra:
circumcision, shaving the pubic region, clipping the nails and cutting the
moustaches short."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 778:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "To shave the pubic hair. to clip the nails and to cut the
moustaches short, are characteristics of the Fitra."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 779:
Narrated Abu Huraira :
I heard the Prophet saying. "Five practices are characteristics of the Fitra:
circumcision, shaving the pubic hair, cutting the moustaches short, clipping
the nails, and depilating the hair of the armpits."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 780:
Narrated Nafi':
Ibn Umar said, The Prophet said, 'Do the opposite of what the pagans do.
Keep the beards and cut the moustaches short.' Whenever Ibn 'Umar
performed the Hajj or 'Umra, he used to hold his beard with his hand and cut
whatever moustaches. Ibn Umar used to cut his moustache so short that the
whiteness of his skin (above the upper lip) was visible, and he used to cut
(the hair) between his moustaches and his beard.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 781:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Cut the moustaches short and leave the beard (as it
is)."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 782:
Narrated Muhammad bin Sirin:
I asked Anas, "Did the Prophet dye his hair?" Anas replied, "The Prophet did
not have except a few grey hairs."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 783:
Narrated Thabit:
Anas was asked whether the Prophet used a a hair dye or not. Anas replied,
"The Prophet had not enough grey hair to dye. I could even count the white
grey hairs oil his beard ill would."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 784:
Narrated IsraiI:
Uthman bin 'Abdullah bin Mauhab said, "My people sent me with a bowl of
water to Um Salama." Isra'il approximated three fingers ('indicating the
small size of the container in which there was some hair of the Prophet.
'Uthman added, "If any person suffered from evil eye or some other disease,
he would send a vessel (containing water) to Um Salama. I looked into the
container (that held the hair of the Prophet) and saw a few red hairs in it,"

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 785:
Narrated Uthman bin 'Abdullah bin Mauhab:
I went to Um Salama and she brought out for us some of the dyed hair of
the Prophet . ibn Mauhab also said that Um Salama had shown him the red
hair of the

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 786:
Narrated Abu Huraira :
The Prophet said, "Jews and Christians do not dye their hair so you should
do the opposite of what they do.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 787:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet was neither conspicuously tall, nor short; neither, very white,
nor tawny. His hair was neither much curled, nor very straight. Allah sent
him (as an Apostle) at the age of forty (and after that) he stayed for ten
years in Mecca, and for ten more years in Medina. Allah took him unto Him
at the age of sixty, and he scarcely had ten white hairs on his head and in his
beard.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 788:
Narrated Al-Bara':
I did not see anybody in a red cloak looking more handsome than the
Prophet Narrated Malik: The hair of the Prophet used to hang near his
shoulders. Narrated Shu'ba: The hair of the Prophet used to hang down to
the earlobes.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 789:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Today I saw myself in a dream near the Ka'ba. I saw a
whitish brown man, the handsomest of all brown men you might ever see.
He had the most beautiful Limma (hair hanging down to the earlobes) you
might ever see. He had combed it and it was dripping water; and he was
performing the Tawaf around the Kaba leaning on two men or on the
shoulders of two men. l asked, "Who is this?" It was said. "Messiah, the son
of Mary." Suddenly I saw a curly-haired man, blind in the right eye which
looked like a protruding out grape. I asked, "Who is this?" It was said, "He is
Masiah Ad-Dajjal."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 790a:
Narrated Anas :
The hair of the Prophet used to hang down up to his shoulders.
Volume 7, Book 72, Number 790b:
Narrated Anas:
The head-hair of the Prophet used to hang down to his shoulders.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 791:
Narrated Qatada:
l asked Anas bin Malik about the hair of Allah's Apostle. He said, "The hair of
Allah's Apostle was neither much straight, nor much curly, and it used to
hang down till between his shoulders and his earlobes.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 792:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet had big hands, and I have never seen anybody like him after
him. The hair of the Prophet was wavy, neither curly nor straight.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 793:
Narrated Anas :
The Prophet had big hands and feet, and I have not seen anybody like him,
neither before nor after him, and his palms were soft.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 794:
Narrated Abu Huraira :
The Prophet had big feet and a good-looking face and l have not seen
anybody like him after him. Narrated Anas: The Prophet had big feet and
hands. Narrated Anas or Jabir bin 'Abdullah The Prophet had big hands and
feet and I have not seen anybody like him after him.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 795:
Narrated Mujahid:
We were with Ibn 'Abbas and the people mentioned Ad-Dajjal. Someone
said, "The word 'Kafir' (unbeliever) is written in between his (Ad-Dajjal's)
eyes." Ibn 'Abbas said, "I have not heard the Prophet saying this, but he
said, 'As regards Abraham, he looks like your companion (i.e. the Prophet,
Muhammad), and as regards Moses, he is a brown curly haired man riding a
camel and reigned with a strong jute rope, as if lam now looking at him
getting down in the valley and saying, "Labbaik".'"

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 796:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar :
I heard 'Umar saying, "Whoever braids his hair should shave it (on finishing
lhram). You'd better not do, something like Talbid." Ibn Umar used to say: "I
saw Allah's Apostle with his hair stuck together with gum."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 797:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
I heard Allah's Apostle, while he was in the state of lhram and his hair was
stuck together with gum, saying, "Labbaik, Allahumma Labbaik, Labbaik La
Shanka laka Labbaik. Inn-al-Hamda Wan-Ni'mata Laka wal-Mulk, La Shanka
Lak." He did not add anything to those words. (See Hadith No. 621, Vol. 2)

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 798:
Narrated Hafsa
(the wife of the Prophet) I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Why have the people
finished their Ihram after performing the 'Umra while you have not finished
your lhram after your 'Umra?" He said, "I have done Talbid (of my hair) and
have decorated my Hadis with garlands, so I shall not finish my lhram till l
have slaughtered my Hadi (animal for sacrifice)."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 799:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet used to copy the people of the Scriptures in matters in which
there was no order from Allah. The people of the Scripture used to let their
hair hang down while the pagans used to part their hair. So the Prophet let
his hair hang down first, but later on he parted it.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 800:
Narrated 'Aisha :
As if I am now looking at the shine of the hair parting of the Prophet while
he was in the state of lhram.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 801:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas :
Once I stayed overnight in the house of my aunt Maimuna bint Al-Harith and
Allah's Apostle was with her as it was her turn. Allah's Apostle got up to
offer the night prayer. I stood on his left but he took hold of my two locks of
hair and made me stand on his right.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 802:
Narrated Abu Bishr
(the above Hadith) but he quoted: Ibn 'Abbas said, (took hold of) my two
braids on my head."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 803:
Narrated Ubaidullah bin Hafs:
that 'Umar bin Nafi' told him that Nafi', Maula 'Abdullah had heard 'Umar
saying, "I heard Allah's Apostle forbidding Al-Qaza'." 'Ubaidullah added: I
said, "What is Al-Qaza'?" 'Ubaidullah pointed (towards his head) to show us
and added, "Nafi' said, 'It is when a boy has his head shaved leaving a tuft of
hair here and a tuft of hair there." Ubaidullah pointed towards his forehead
and the sides of his head. 'Ubaidullah was asked, "Does this apply to both
girls and boys?" He said, "I don't know, but Nafi' said, 'The boy.'" 'Ubaidullah
added, "I asked Nafi' again, and he said, 'As for leaving hair on the temples
and the back part of the boy's head, there is no harm, but Al-Qaza' is to
leave a tuft of hair on his forehead unshaved while there is no hair on the
rest of his head, and also to leave hair on either side of his head.'"

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 804:
Narrated (Abdullah) bin 'Umar :
Allah's Apostle forbade Al-Qaza' (leaving a tuft of hair here and there after
shaving one's head.)

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 805:
Narrated 'Aisha :
I applied perfume to the Prophet with my own hands when he wanted to
assume the state of Ihram, and I also perfumed him at Mina before he
departed from there (to perform Tawaf-al-Ifada).
Volume 7, Book 72, Number 806:
Narrated 'Aisha :
I used to perfume Allah's Apostle with the best scent available till I saw the
shine of the scent on his head and shine beard.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 807:
Narrated Sa'd:
A man peeped into the house of the Prophet through a hole while the
Prophet was scratching his head with a Midrai (a certain kind of comb). On
that the Prophet said (to him), "If I had known you had been looking, then I
would have pierced your eye with that instrument, because the asking of
permission has been ordained so that one would not see things unlawfully."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 808:
Narrated 'Aisha :
I used to comb the hair of Allah's Apostle during my periods.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 809:
Narrated 'Aisha
(As above, (808).

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 810:
'Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to like to start from the right side as far as possible in
combing and in performing ablution.
Volume 7, Book 72, Number 811:
Narrated Abu Huraira :
The Prophet said, "(Allah said), 'Every good deed of Adam's son is for him
except fasting; it is for Me. and I shall reward (the fasting person) for it.'
Verily, the smell of the mouth of a fasting person is better to Allah than the
smell of musk."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 812:
Narrated 'Aisha :
used to perfume the Prophet before his assuming the state of with the best
scent available.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 813:
Narrated Thumama bin 'Abdullah;
Anas never used to refuse (a gift of) scent and used to say that the Prophet
never used to refuse (a gift of) scent.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 814:
Narrated 'Aisha :
During Hajjat-al-Wada', I perfumed Allah's Apostle with Dharira with my own
hands, both on his assuming Ihram and on finishing it.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 815:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
Allah has cursed those women who practise tattooing and those who get
themselves tattooed, and those who remove their face hairs, and those who
create a space between their teeth artificially to look beautiful, and such
women as change the features created by Allah. Why then should I not
curse those whom the Prophet has cursed? And that is in Allah's Book. i.e.
His Saying: 'And what the Apostle gives you take it and what he forbids you
abstain (from it).' (59.7)

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 816:
Narrated Humaid bin 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf
that in the year he performed Hajj. he heard Mu'awiya bin Abi Sufyan, who
was on the pulpit and was taking a tuft of hair from one of his guards,
saying, "Where are your religious learned men? I heard Allah's Apostle
forbidding this (false hair) and saying, 'The children of Israel were destroyed
when their women started using this.'" Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet
said, "Allah has cursed the lady who artificially lengthens (her or someone
else's) hair and the one who gets her hair lengthened and the One who
tattoos (herself or someone else) and the one who gets herself tattooed"

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 817:
Narrated 'Aisha :
An Ansari girl was married and she became sick and all her hair fell out
intending to provide her with false hair. They asked the Prophet who said,
"Allah has cursed the lady who artificially lengthens (her or someone else's)
hair and also the one who gets her hair lengthened."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 818:
Narrated Asma:
(the daughter of Abu' Bakr) A woman came to Allah's Apostle and said, "I
married my daughter to someone, but she became sick and all her hair fell
out, and (because of that) her husband does not like her. May I let her use
false hair?" On that the Prophet cursed such a lady as artificially lengthening
(her or someone else's) hair or got her hair lengthened artificially.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 819:
Narrated Asma'
(the daughter of Abu Bakr) Allah's Apostle has cursed such a lady as
artificially lengthening (her or someone else's) hair or gets her hair
lengthened.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 820:
Narrated Ibn Umar
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah has cursed such a lady as lengthens (her or
someone else's) hair artificially or gets it lengthened, and also a lady who
tattoos (herself or someone else) or gets herself tattooed.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 821:
Narrated Sa'id bin Al-Musaiyab:
Mu'awiya came to Medina for the last time and delivered a sermon. He took
out a tuft of hair and said, "I thought that none used to do this (i.e. use false
hair) except Jews. The Prophet labelled such practice, (i.e. the use of false
hair), as cheating.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 822:
Narrated 'Alqama:
'Abdullah cursed those women who practiced tattooing and those who
removed hair from their faces and those who created spaces between their
teeth artificially to look beautiful, such ladies as changed what Allah has
created. Um Ya'qub said, "What is that?" 'Abdullah said, "Why should I not
curse those who were cursed by Allah's Apostle and are referred to in
Allah's Book?" She said to him "By Allah, I have read the whole Qur'an but I
have not found such a thing. 'Abdullah said, "By Allah, if you had read it
(carefully) you would have found it. (Allah says:) 'And what the Apostle
gives you take it and what he forbids you abstain (from it).' (59.7)

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 823:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar :
The Prophet has cursed the lady who lengthens her hair artificially and the
one who gets her hair lengthened, and also the lady who tattoos (herself or
others) and the one who gets herself tattooed.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 824:
Narrated Asma':
A woman asked the Prophet saying, "0 Allah's Apostle! My daughter got
measles and her hair fell out. Now that I got her married, may I let her use
false hair?" He said (to her), "Allah has cursed the lady who lengthens hair
artificially and the one who gets her hair lengthened artificially."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 825:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar :
I heard the Prophet saying, (or the Prophet said), "Allah has cursed the lady
who practices tattooing and that who gets it done for herself, and also the
lady who lengthens hair artificially and that who gets her hair lengthened
artificially." The Prophet has cursed such ladies.
Volume 7, Book 72, Number 826:
Narrated Ibn Mas'ud:
Allah has cursed those women who practise tattooing or get it done for
themselves, and those who remove hair from their faces, and those who
create spaces between their teeth artificially to look beautiful, such ladies as
change the features created by Allah. Why then shall I not curse those
whom Allah's Apostle has cursed and who are cursed in Allah's Book too?

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 827:
Narrated Abu Huraira :
Allah's Apostle said, "The evil eye is a fact," and he forbade tattooing.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 828:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
(As above 827).

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 829:
Narrated Abu Juhaifa:
The Prophet forbade the use of the price of blood and the price of a dog,
the one who takes (eats) usury the one who gives usury, the woman who
practises tattooing and the woman who gets herself tattooed.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 830:
Narrated Abu Huraira :
A woman who used to practise tattooing was brought to 'Umar. 'Umar got
up and said, "I beseech you by Allah, which of you heard the Prophet saying
something about tattooing?" l got up and said, "0 chief of the Believers! l
heard something." He said, "What did you hear?" I said, "I heard the Prophet
(addressing the ladies), saying, 'Do not practise tattooing and do not get
yourselves tattooed.'"

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 831:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar :
The Prophet has cursed the lady who lengthens hair artificially and that who
gets her hair lengthened in such away, and the lady who practises tattooing
and that who gets it done for herself.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 832:
Narrated 'Abdullah :
Allah has cursed those women who practise tattooing and those who get it
done for themselves, and those who remove hair from their faces, and
those who artificially create spaces between their teeth to look beautiful,
such women as alter the features created by Allah. Why should I not then
curse those whom Allah's Apostle has cursed and that is in Allah's Book?

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 833:
Narrated Abu Talha :
The Prophet said, "Angels do not enter a house in which there is a dog or
there are pictures."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 834:
Narrated Muslim
We were with Masruq at the house of Yasar bin Numair. Masruq saw
pictures on his terrace and said, "I heard 'Abdullah saying that he heard the
Prophet saying, "The people who will receive the severest punishment from
Allah will be the picture makers.'"

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 835:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar :
Allah's Apostle said, "Those who make these pictures will be punished on
the Day of Resurrection, and it will be said to them. 'Make alive what you
have created.'"

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 836:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I never used to leave in the Prophet house anything carrying images or
crosses but he obliterated it.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 837:
Narrated Abu Zur'a:
l entered a house in Medina with Abu Huraira, and he saw a man making
pictures at the top of the house. Abu Huraira said, "I heard Allah's Apostle
saying that Allah said, 'Who would be more unjust than the one who tries to
create the like of My creatures? Let them create a grain: let them create a
gnat.' "Abu Huraira then asked for a water container and washed his arms
up to his armpits. I said, "0 Abu i Huraira! Is this something you have heard I
from Allah's Apostle?" He said, "The limit for ablution is up to the place
where the ornaments will reach on the Day of Resurrection.'

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 838:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle returned from a journey when I had placed a curtain of mine
having pictures over (the door of) a chamber of mine. When Allah's Apostle
saw it, he tore it and said, "The people who will receive the severest
punishment on the Day of Resurrection will be those who try to make the
like of Allah's creations." So we turned it (i.e., the curtain) into one or two
cushions.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 839:
Narrated Aisha:
The Prophet returned from a journey when I had hung a thick curtain having
pictures (in front of a door). He ordered me to remove it and I removed it.
Aisha added: The Prophet and I used to take a bath from one container (of
water).

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 840:
Narrated 'Aisha :
I purchased a cushion with pictures on it. The Prophet (came and) stood at
the door but did not enter. I said (to him), "I repent to Allah for what (the
guilt) I have done." He said, "What is this cushion?" I said, "It is for you to sit
on and recline on." He said, "The makers of these pictures will be punished
on the Day of Resurrection and it will be said to them, 'Make alive what you
have created.' Moreover, the angels do not enter a house where there are
pictures.'"

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 841:
Narrated Abu Talha:
Allah's Apostle said, "Angels (of mercy) do not enter a house where there
are pictures.'" The sub-narrator Busr added: "Then Zaid fell ill and we paid
him a visit. Behold! There was, hanging at his door, a curtain decorated with
a picture. I said to 'Ubaidullah Al-Khaulani, the step son of Maimuna, the
wife of the Prophet , "Didn't Zaid tell us about the picture the day before
yesterday?" 'Ubaidullah said, "Didn't you hear him saying: 'except a design in
a garment'?"

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 842:
Narrated Anas:
Aisha had a thick curtain (having pictures on it) and she screened the side of
her i house with it. The Prophet said to her, "Remove it from my sight, for its
pictures are still coming to my mind in my prayers."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 843:
Narrated Salim's father:
Once Gabriel promised to visit the Prophet but he delayed and the Prophet
got worried about that. At last he came out and found Gabriel and
complained to him of his grief (for his delay). Gabriel said to him, "We do not
enter a place in which there is a picture or a dog."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 844:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet)
I bought a cushion having pictures on it. When Allah's Apostle saw it, he
stopped at the gate and did not enter. I noticed the signs of hatred (for
that) on his face! I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I turn to Allah and His Apostle in
repentance! What sin have I committed?" He said, "What about this
cushion?" I said, 'I bought it for you to sit on and recline on." Allah's Apostle
said, "The makers of these pictures will be punished (severely) on the Day of
Resurrection and it will be said to them, 'Make alive what you have
created.'" He added, "Angels do not enter a house in which there are
pictures."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 845:
Narrated Abu Juhaifa:
that he had bought a slave whose profession was cupping. The Prophet
forbade taking the price of blood and the price of a dog and the earnings of
a prostitute, and cursed the one who took or gave (Riba') usury, and the
lady who tattooed others or got herself tattooed, and the picture-maker.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 846:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
I heard Muhammad saying, "Whoever makes a picture in this world will be
asked to put life into it on the Day of Resurrection, but he will not be able to
do so."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 847:
Narrated Usama bin Zaid:
Allah's Apostle rode a donkey saddled with a saddle covered with a
Fadakiyya velvet sheet, and he made me ride behind him.

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 848:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
When the Prophet arrived at Mecca, the children of Bani 'Abdul Muttalib
received him. He then mounted one of them in front of him and the other
behind him.
Volume 7, Book 72, Number 849:
Narrated Aiyub:
The worst of three (persons riding one, animal) was mentioned in 'Ikrima's
presence 'Ikrima said, "Ibn 'Abbas said, '(In the year of the conquest of
Mecca) the Prophet came and mounted Qutham in front of him and Al-Fadl
behind him, or Qutham behind him and Al-Fadl in front of him.' Now which
of them was the worst off and which was the best?"

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 850:
Narrated Mu'adh bin Jabal
While I was riding behind the Prophet and between me and him and
between me and him there was only the back of the saddle, he said, "0
Mu'adh!" I replied, "Labbaik, 0 Allah's Apostle, and Sa'daik!" he said, "Do
you know what is Allah's right upon his slave?" I said, "Allah and His Apostle
know best" He said "Allah's right upon his slaves is that they should worship
Him alone and not worship anything else besides Him." Then he proceeded
for a while and then said, "O Muadh bin Jabal!" I replied, "Labbaik, O Allah's
Apostle:, Sa'daik!' He said, "Do you know what is the right of the slaves upon
Allah if they do that?" I replied, "Allah and His Apostle know best." He said,
"The right of the slaves upon Allah is that He will not punish them (if they do
that)."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 851:
Narrated Anas bin Malik :
We were coming from Khaibar along with Allah's Apostle while l was riding
behind Abu Talha and he was proceeding. While one of the wives of Allah's
Apostle was riding behind Allah's Apostle, suddenly the foot of the camel
Slipped and I said, "The woman!" and alighted (hurriedly). Allah's Apostle
said, "She is your mother." Sol resaddled the she-camel and Allah's Apostle
mounted it. When he approached or saw Medina, he said, "Ayibun, ta'ibun,
'abidun, li-Rabbina hami-dun."

Volume 7, Book 72, Number 852:
Narrated 'Abbad bin Tamim's uncle:
I saw the Prophet lying-down in the mosque and placing one leg on the
other.
VOLUME 8
BOOK 73. GOOD MANNERS AND FORM (AL-ADAB) (1-245)
Volume 8, Book 73, Number 1:
Narrated Al-Walid bin 'Aizar:
I heard Abi Amr 'Ash-Shaibani saying, "The owner of this house." he pointed
to 'Abdullah's house, "said, 'I asked the Prophet 'Which deed is loved most
by Allah?" He replied, 'To offer prayers at their early (very first) stated
times.' " 'Abdullah asked, "What is the next (in goodness)?" The Prophet
said, "To be good and dutiful to one's parents," 'Abdullah asked, "What is
the next (in goodness)?" The Prophet said, To participate in Jihad for Allah's
Cause." 'Abdullah added, "The Prophet narrated to me these three things,
and if I had asked more, he would have told me more."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 2:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Who is more
entitled to be treated with the best companionship by me?" The Prophet
said, "Your mother." The man said. "Who is next?" The Prophet said, "Your
mother." The man further said, "Who is next?" The Prophet said, "Your
mother." The man asked for the fourth time, "Who is next?" The Prophet
said, "Your father. "

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 3:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
A man said to the Prophet, "Shall I participate in Jihad?" The Prophet said,
"Are your parents living?" The man said, "Yes." the Prophet said, "Do Jihad
for their benefit."
Volume 8, Book 73, Number 4:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
Allah's Apostle said. "It is one of the greatest sins that a man should curse
his parents." It was asked (by the people), "O Allah's Apostle! How does a
man curse his parents?" The Prophet said, "'The man abuses the father of
another man and the latter abuses the father of the former and abuses his
mother."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 5:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "While three persons were traveling, they were
overtaken by rain and they took shelter in a cave in a mountain. A big rock
fell from the mountain over the mouth of the cave and blocked it. They said
to each other. 'Think of such good (righteous) deeds which, you did for
Allah's sake only, and invoke Allah by giving reference to those deeds so
that Allah may relieve you from your difficulty. one of them said, 'O Allah! I
had my parents who were very old and I had small children for whose sake I
used to work as a shepherd. When I returned to them at night and milked
(the sheep), I used to start giving the milk to my parents first before giving
to my children. And one day I went far away in search of a grazing place (for
my sheep), and didn't return home till late at night and found that my
parents had slept. I milked (my livestock) as usual and brought the milk
vessel and stood at their heads, and I disliked to wake them up from their
sleep, and I also disliked to give the milk to my children before my parents
though my children were crying (from hunger) at my feet.
So this state of mine and theirs continued till the day dawned. (O Allah!) If
you considered that I had done that only for seeking Your pleasure, then
please let there be an opening through which we can see the sky.' So Allah
made for them an opening through which they could see the sky. Then the
second person said, 'O Allah! I had a she-cousin whom I loved as much as a
passionate man love a woman. I tried to seduce her but she refused till I paid
her one-hundred Dinars So I worked hard till I collected one hundred Dinars
and went to her with that But when I sat in between her legs (to have sexual
intercourse with her), she said, 'O Allah's slave! Be afraid of Allah ! Do not
deflower me except legally (by marriage contract). So I left her O Allah! If
you considered that I had done that only for seeking Your pleasure then
please let the rock move a little to have a (wider) opening.'
So Allah shifted that rock to make the opening wider for them. And the last
(third) person said 'O Allah ! I employed a laborer for wages equal to a Faraq
(a certain measure: of rice, and when he had finished his job he demanded
his wages, but when I presented his due to him, he gave it up and refused to
take it. Then I kept on sowing that rice for him (several times) till managed
to buy with the price of the yield, some cows and their shepherd Later on
the laborer came to me an said. '(O Allah's slave!) Be afraid o Allah, and do
not be unjust to me an give me my due.' I said (to him). 'Go and take those
cows and their shepherd. So he took them and went away. (So, O Allah!) If
You considered that I had done that for seeking Your pleasure, then please
remove the remaining part of the rock.' And so Allah released them (from
their difficulty)."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 6:
Narrated Al-Mughira:
The Prophet said, "Allah has forbidden you ( 1 ) to be undutiful to your
mothers (2) to withhold (what you should give) or (3) demand (what you do
not deserve), and (4) to bury your daughters alive. And Allah has disliked
that (A) you talk too much about others ( B), ask too many questions (in
religion), or (C) waste your property."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 7:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
Allah's Apostle said thrice, "Shall I not inform you of the biggest of the great
sins?" We said, "Yes, O Allah's Apostle" He said, "To join partners in worship
with Allah: to be undutiful to one's parents." The Prophet sat up after he
had been reclining and added, "And I warn you against giving forged
statement and a false witness; I warn you against giving a forged statement
and a false witness." The Prophet kept on saying that warning till we
thought that he would not stop.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 8:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle mentioned the greatest sins or he was asked about the
greatest sins. He said, "To join partners in worship with Allah; to kill a soul
which Allah has forbidden to kill; and to be undutiful or unkind to one's
parents." The Prophet added, "Shall I inform you of the biggest of the great
sins? That is the forged statement or the false witness." Shu'ba (the subnarrator) states that most probably the Prophet said, "the false witness."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 9:
Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr:
My mother came to me, hoping (for my favor) during the lifetime of the
Prophet asked the Prophet, "May I treat her kindly?" He replied, "Yes." Ibn
'Uyaina said, "Then Allah revealed: 'Allah forbids you not with regards to
those who fought not against you because of religion, and drove you not
out from your homes, that you should show them kindness and deal justly
with them.'.......(60.8)

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 10:
Narrated Abu Sufyan:
That Heraclius sent for him and said, "What did he, i.e. the Prophet order
you?" I replied, "He orders us to offer prayers; to give alms; to be chaste;
and to keep good relations with our relatives.
Volume 8, Book 73, Number 11:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
My father, seeing a silken cloak being sold, said, "O Allah's Apostle! Buy this
and wear it on Fridays and when the foreign delegates pay a visit to you." He
said, "This is worn only by that person who will have no share in the
Hereafter." Later a few silken cloaks were given to the Prophet as a gift, and
he sent one of those cloaks to 'Umar. 'Umar said (to the Prophet), "How can
I wear it while you have said about it what you said?" The Prophet said, "I did
not give it to you to wear but to sell or to give to someone else to wear." So
'Umar sent it to his (pagan) brother who was from the inhabitants of Mecca
before he ('Umar's brother) embraced Islam.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 12:
Narrated Abu Aiyub Al-Ansari:
A man said, "O Allah's Apostle! Inform me of a deed which will make me
enter Paradise." The people said, "What is the matter with him? What is the
matter with him?" Allah's Apostle said, "He has something to ask (what he
needs greatly)." The Prophet said (to him), (In order to enter Paradise) you
should worship Allah and join none in worship with Him: You should offer
prayers perfectly, give obligatory charity (Zakat), and keep good relations
with your Kith and kin." He then said, "Leave it!" (The sub-narrator said, "It
seems that the Prophet was riding his she camel."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 13:
Narrated Jubair bin Mut'im:
That he heard the Prophet saying, "The person who severs the bond of
kinship will not enter Paradise."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 14:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Who ever is pleased that he be granted more
wealth and that his lease of life be pro longed, then he should keep good
relations with his Kith and kin."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 15:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah 's Apostle said, "Whoever loves that he be granted more wealth and
that his lease of life be prolonged then he should keep good relations with
his Kith and kin."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 16:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah created the creations, and when He finished from
His creations, Ar-Rahm i.e., womb said, "(O Allah) at this place I seek refuge
with You from all those who sever me (i.e. sever the ties of Kith and kin).
Allah said, 'Yes, won't you be pleased that I will keep good relations with the
one who will keep good relations with you, and I will sever the relation with
the one who will sever the relations with you.' It said, 'Yes, O my Lord.' Allah
said, 'Then that is for you ' " Allah's Apostle added. "Read (in the Qur'an) if
you wish, the Statement of Allah: 'Would you then, if you were given the
authority, do mischief in the land and sever your ties of kinship?' (47.22)

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 17:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The word 'Ar-Rahm (womb) derives its name from ArRahman (i.e., one of the names of Allah) and Allah said: 'I will keep good
relation with the one who will keep good relation with you, (womb i.e. Kith
and Kin) and sever the relation with him who will sever the relation with
you, (womb, i.e. Kith and Kin).

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 18:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) The Prophet said, "The word 'Ar-Rahm' (womb)
derives its name from 'Ar-Rahman' (i.e. Allah). So whosoever keeps good
relations with it (womb i.e. Kith and kin), Allah will keep good relations with
him, and whosoever will sever it (i.e. severs his bonds of Kith and kin) Allah
too will sever His relations with him.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 19:
Narrated 'Amr bin Al-'As:
I heard the Prophet saying openly not secretly, "The family of Abu so-and-so
(i.e. Talib) are not among my protectors." 'Amr said that there was a blank
space (1) in the Book of Muhammad bin Ja'far. He added, "My Protector is
Allah and the righteous believing people." 'Amr bin Al-'As added: I heard the
Prophet saying, 'But they (that family) have kinship (Rahm) with me and I
will be good and dutiful to them. "

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 20:
Narrated Abdullah bin 'Amr:
The Prophet said, "Al-Wasil is not the one who recompenses the good done
to him by his relatives, but Al-Wasil is the one who keeps good relations with
those relatives who had severed the bond of kinship with him."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 21:
Narrated Hakim bin Hizam
That he said, "O Allah's Apostle! What do you think about my good deeds
which I used to do during the period of ignorance (before embracing Islam)
like keeping good relations with my Kith and kin, manumitting of slaves and
giving alms etc; Shall I receive the reward for that?" Allah's Apostle said,
"You have embraced Islam with all those good deeds which you did.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 22:
Narrated Sa'id:
Um Khalid bint Khalid bin Said said, "I came to Allah's Apostle along with my
father and I was wearing a yellow shirt. Allah's Apostle said, "Sanah Sanah!"
('Abdullah, the sub-narrator said, "It means, 'Nice, nice!' in the Ethiopian
language.") Um Khalid added, "Then I started playing with the seal of
Prophethood. My father admonished me. But Allah's Apostle said (to my
father), "Leave her," Allah's Apostle (then addressing me) said, "May you
live so long that your dress gets worn out, and you will mend it many times,
and then wear another till it gets worn out (i.e. May Allah prolong your
life)." (The sub-narrator, 'Abdullah aid, "That garment (which she was
wearing remained usable for a long

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 23:
Narrated Ibn Abi Na'm:
-smelling flowers in this world."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 24:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) A lady along with her two daughters came to me
asking me (for some alms), but she found nothing with me except one date
which I gave to her and she divided it between her two daughters, and then
she got up and went away. Then the Prophet came in and I informed him
about this story. He said, "Whoever is in charge of (put to test by) these
daughters and treats them generously, then they will act as a shield for him
from the (Hell) Fire."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 25:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
The Prophet came out towards us, while carrying Umamah, the daughter of
Abi Al-As (his grand-daughter) over his shoulder. He prayed, and when he
wanted to bow, he put her down, and when he stood up, he lifted her up.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 26:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle kissed Al-Hasan bin Ali while Al-Aqra' bin Habis At-Tamim was
sitting beside him. Al-Aqra said, "I have ten children and I have never kissed
anyone of them," Allah's Apostle cast a look at him and said, "Whoever is
not merciful to others will not be treated mercifully."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 27:
Narrated 'Aisha:
A bedouin came to the Prophet and said, "You (people) kiss the boys! We
don't kiss them." The Prophet said, "I cannot put mercy in your heart after
Allah has taken it away from it."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 28:
Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:
Some Sabi (i.e. war prisoners, children and woman only) were brought
before the Prophet and behold, a woman amongst them was milking her
breasts to feed and whenever she found a child amongst the captives, she
took it over her chest and nursed it (she had lost her child but later she
found him) the Prophet said to us, "Do you think that this lady can throw her
son in the fire?" We replied, "No, if she has the power not to throw it (in the
fire)." The Prophet then said, "Allah is more merciful to His slaves than this
lady to her son."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 29:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, Allah divided Mercy into one-hundred parts
and He kept its ninety-nine parts with Him and sent down its one part on the
earth, and because of that, its one single part, His creations are Merciful to
each other, so that even the mare lifts up its hoofs away from its baby
animal, lest it should trample on it."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 30:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
I said 'O Allah's Apostle! Which sin is the greatest?" He said, "To set up a rival
unto Allah, though He Alone created you." I said, "What next?" He said, "To
kill your son lest he should share your food with you." I further asked, "What
next?" He said, "To commit illegal sexual intercourse with the wife of your
neighbor." And then Allah revealed as proof of the statement of the
Prophet: 'Those who invoke not with Allah any other god)................. (to end
of verse)...' (25.68)

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 31:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet took a child in his lap for Tahnik (i.e. he chewed a date in his
mouth and put its juice in the mouth of the child). The child urinated on him,
so he asked for water and poured it over the place of the urine.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 32:
Narrated Usama bin Zaid:
Allah's Apostle used to put me on (one of) his thighs and put Al-Hasan bin
'Ali on his other thigh, and then embrace us and say, "O Allah! Please be
Merciful to them, as I am merciful to them. "

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 33:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I never felt so jealous of any woman as I did of Khadija, though she had died
three years before the Prophet married me, and that was because I heard
him mentioning her too often, and because his Lord had ordered him to give
her the glad tidings that she would have a palace in Paradise, made of Qasab
and because he used to slaughter a sheep and distribute its meat among her
friends.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 34:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:
The Prophet said, "I and the person who looks after an orphan and provides
for him, will be in Paradise like this," putting his index and middle fingers
together.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 35:
Narrated Safwan bin Salim:
The Prophet said "The one who looks after and works for a widow and for a
poor person, is like a warrior fighting for Allah's Cause or like a person who
fasts during the day and prays all the night." Narrated Abu Huraira that the
Prophet said as above.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 36:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The one who looks after and works for a widow and
for a poor person is like a warrior fighting for Allah's Cause." (The narrator
Al-Qa'nabi is not sure whether he also said "Like the one who prays all the
night without slackness and fasts continuously and never breaks his fast.")

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 37:
Narrated Abu Sulaiman and Malik bin Huwairith:
We came to the Prophet and we were (a few) young men of approximately
equal age and stayed with him for twenty nights. Then he thought that we
were anxious for our families, and he asked us whom we had left behind to
look after our families, and we told him. He was kindhearted and merciful,
so he said, "Return to your families and teach them (religious knowledge)
and order them (to do good deeds) and offer your prayers in the way you
saw me offering my prayers, and when the stated time for the prayer
becomes due, then one of you should pronounce its call (i.e. the Adhan),
and the eldest of you should lead you in prayer.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 38:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "While a man was walking on a road. he became very
thirsty. Then he came across a well, got down into it, drank (of its water)
and then came out. Meanwhile he saw a dog panting and licking mud
because of excessive thirst. The man said to himself "This dog is suffering
from the same state of thirst as I did." So he went down the well (again) and
filled his shoe (with water) and held it in his mouth and watered the dog.
Allah thanked him for that deed and forgave him." The people asked, "O
Allah's Apostle! Is there a reward for us in serving the animals?" He said,
"(Yes) There is a reward for serving any animate (living being) ."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 39:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle stood up for the prayer and we too stood up along with him.
Then a bedouin shouted while offering prayer. "O Allah! Bestow Your Mercy
on me and Muhammad only and do not bestow it on anybody else along
with us." When the Prophet had finished his prayer with Taslim, he said to
the Bedouin, "You have limited (narrowed) a very vast (thing)," meaning
Allah's Mercy.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 40:
Narrated An-Nu'man bin Bashir:
Allah's Apostle said, "You see the believers as regards their being merciful
among themselves and showing love among themselves and being kind,
resembling one body, so that, if any part of the body is not well then the
whole body shares the sleeplessness (insomnia) and fever with it."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 41:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "If any Muslim plants any plant and a human being or an
animal eats of it, he will be rewarded as if he had given that much in
charity."
Volume 8, Book 73, Number 42:
Narrated Jarir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "He who is not merciful to others, will not be treated
mercifully.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 43:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said "Gabriel continued to recommend me about treating the
neighbors Kindly and politely so much so that I thought he would order me
to make them as my heirs.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 44:
Narrates Ibn Umar:
Allah' Apostle said, Gabriel kept on recommending me about treating the
neighbors in a kind and polite manner, so much so that I thought that he
would order (me) to make them (my) heirs."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 45:
Narrated Abu Shuraih:
The Prophet said, "By Allah, he does not believe! By Allah, he does not
believe! By Allah, he does not believe!" It was said, "Who is that, O Allah's
Apostle?" He said, "That person whose neighbor does not feel safe from his
evil."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 46:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet used to say, "O Muslim ladies! A neighbouress should not look
down upon the present of her neighbouress even it were the hooves of a
sheep."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 47:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Anybody who believes in Allah and the Last Day should
not harm his neighbor, and anybody who believes in Allah and the Last Day
should entertain his guest generously and anybody who believes in Allah
and the Last Day should talk what is good or keep quiet. (i.e. abstain from all
kinds of evil and dirty talk).

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 48:
Narrated Abu Shuraih Al-Adawi:
My ears heard and my eyes saw the Prophet when he spoke, "Anybody who
believes in Allah and the Last Day, should serve his neighbor generously, and
anybody who believes in Allah and the Last Day should serve his guest
generously by giving him his reward." It was asked. "What is his reward, O
Allah's Apostle?" He said, "(To be entertained generously) for a day and a
night with high quality of food and the guest has the right to be entertained
for three days (with ordinary food) and if he stays longer, what he will be
provided with will be regarded as Sadaqa (a charitable gift). And anybody
who believes in Allah and the Last Day should talk what is good or keep
quite (i.e. abstain from all kinds of dirty and evil talks)."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 49:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have two neighbors! To whom shall I send my
gifts?" He said, "To the one whose gate in nearer to you."
Volume 8, Book 73, Number 50:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, Enjoining, all that is good is a Sadaqa."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 51:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari:
The Prophet said, "On every Muslim there is enjoined (a compulsory) Sadaqa
(alms)." They (the people) said, "If one has nothing?' He said, "He should
work with his hands so that he may benefit himself and give in charity." They
said, "If he cannot work or does not work?" He said, "Then he should help
the oppressed unhappy person (by word or action or both)." They said, "If
he does not do it?" He said, "Then he should enjoin what is good (or said
what is reasonable).' They said, "If he does not do that''' He said, "Then he
should refrain from doing evil, for that will be considered for Him as a
Sadaqa (charity) . "

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 52:
Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim:
The Prophet mentioned the (Hell) Fire and sought refuge (with Allah) from
it, and turned his face to the other side. He mentioned the (Hell) Fire again
and took refuge (with Allah) from it and turned his face to the other side.
(Shu'ba, the sub-narrator, said, "I have no doubt that the Prophet repeated
it twice.") The Prophet then said, "(O people!) Save yourselves from the
(Hell) Fire even if with one half of a date fruit (given in charity), and if this is
not available, then (save yourselves) by saying a good pleasant friendly
word."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 53:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) A group of Jews entered upon the Prophet and
said, "As-Samu-Alaikum." (i.e. death be upon you). I understood it and said,
"Wa-Alaikum As-Samu wal-la'n. (death and the curse of Allah be Upon you)."
Allah's Apostle said "Be calm, O 'Aisha! Allah loves that on, should be kind
and lenient in all matters." I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Haven't you heard what
they (the Jews) have said?" Allah's Apostle said "I have (already) said (to
them) "And upon you ! "

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 54:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
A bedouin urinated in the mosque and the people ran to (beat) him. Allah's
Apostle said, "Do not interrupt his urination (i.e. let him finish)." Then the
Prophet asked for a tumbler of water and poured the water over the place
of urine.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 55:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "A believer to another believer is like a building whose
different parts enforce each other." The Prophet then clasped his hands
with the fingers interlaced. (At that time) the Prophet was sitting and a man
came and begged or asked for something. The Prophet faced us and said,
"Help and recommend him and you will receive the reward for it, and Allah
will bring about what He will through His Prophet's tongue."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 56o:
Narrated Abu Musa:
Whenever a beggar or a person in need came to the Prophet, the Prophet
would say "Help and recommend him and you will receive the reward for it,
and Allah will bring about what he will through His Prophet's tongue

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 56:
Narrated Masruq:
Abdullah bin 'Amr mentioned Allah's Apostle saying that he was neither a
Fahish nor a Mutafahish. Abdullah bin 'Amr added, Allah's Apostle said, 'The
best among you are those who have the best manners and character.'

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 57:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mulaika:
'Aisha said that the Jews came to the Prophet and said, "As-Samu 'Alaikum"
(death be on you). 'Aisha said (to them), "(Death) be on you, and may Allah
curse you and shower His wrath upon you!" The Prophet said, "Be calm, O
'Aisha ! You should be kind and lenient, and beware of harshness and Fuhsh
(i.e. bad words)." She said (to the Prophet), "Haven't you heard what they
(Jews) have said?" He said, "Haven't you heard what I have said (to them)? I
said the same to them, and my invocation against them will be accepted
while theirs against me will be rejected (by Allah). "

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 58:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet was not one who would abuse (others) or say obscene words,
or curse (others), and if he wanted to admonish anyone of us, he used to
say: "What is wrong with him, his forehead be dusted!"

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 59o:
Narrated 'Aisha:
A man asked permission to enter upon the Prophet. When the Prophet saw
him, he said, "What an evil brother of his tribe! And what an evil son of his
tribe!" When that man sat down, the Prophet behaved with him in a nice
and polite manner and was completely at ease with him. When that person
had left, 'Aisha said (to the Prophet). "O Allah's Apostle! When you saw that
man, you said so-and-so about him, then you showed him a kind and polite
behavior, and you enjoyed his company?" Allah's Apostle said, "O 'Aisha!
Have you ever seen me speaking a bad and dirty language? (Remember
that) the worst people in Allah's sight on the Day of Resurrection will be
those whom the people leave (undisturbed) to be away from their evil
(deeds)."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 59i:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet was the best among the people (both in shape and character)
and was the most generous of them, and was the bravest of them. Once,
during the night, the people of Medina got afraid (of a sound). So the
people went towards that sound, but the Prophet having gone to that
sound before them, met them while he was saying, "Don't be afraid, don't
be afraid." (At that time) he was riding a horse belonging to Abu Talha and it
was naked without a saddle, and he was carrying a sword slung at his neck.
The Prophet said, "I found it (the horse) like a sea, or, it is the sea indeed."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 60:
Narrated Jabir:
Never was the Prophet asked for a thing to be given for which his answer
was 'no'.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 61:
Narrated Masruq:
We were sitting with 'Abdullah bin 'Amr who was narrating to us (Hadith):
He said, "Allah's Apostle was neither a Fahish nor a Mutafahhish, and he
used to say, 'The best among you are the best in character (having good
manners)."'

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 62:
Narrated Abu Hazim:
Sahl bin Sa'd said that a woman brought a Burda (sheet) to the Prophet.
Sahl asked the people, "Do you know what is a Burda?" The people replied,
"It is a 'Shamla', a sheet with a fringe." That woman said, "O Allah's Apostle!
I have brought it so that you may wear it." So the Prophet took it because
he was in need of it and wore it. A man among his companions, seeing him
wearing it, said, "O Allah's Apostle! Please give it to me to wear." The
Prophet said, "Yes." (and gave him that sheet). When the Prophet left, the
man was blamed by his companions who said, "It was not nice on your part
to ask the Prophet for it while you know that he took it because he was in
need of it, and you also know that he (the Prophet) never turns down
anybody's request that he might be asked for." That man said, "I just
wanted to have its blessings as the Prophet had put it on, so l hoped that I
might be shrouded in it."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 63:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Time will pass rapidly, good deeds will decrease, and
miserliness will be thrown (in the hearts of the people), and the Harj (will
increase)." They asked, "What is the Harj?" He replied, "(It is) killing
(murdering), (it is) murdering (killing).

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 64:
Narrated Anas:
I served the Prophet for ten years, and he never said to me, "Uf" (a minor
harsh word denoting impatience) and never blamed me by saying, "Why did
you do so or why didn't you do so?"

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 65:
Narrated Al-Aswad:
I asked 'Aisha what did the Prophet use to do at home. She replied. "He
used to keep himself busy serving his family and when it was time for the
prayer, he would get up for prayer."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 66:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "If Allah loves a person, He calls Gabriel saying: 'Allah
loves so and so; O Gabriel, love him.' Gabriel would love him, and then
Gabriel would make an announcement among the residents of the Heaven,
'Allah loves so-and-so, therefore, you should love him also.' So, all the
residents of the Heavens would love him and then he is granted the pleasure
of the people of the earth."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 67:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "None will have the sweetness (delight) of Faith (a) till he
loves a person and loves him only for Allah's sake, (b) and till it becomes
dearer to him to be thrown in the fire than to revert to disbelief
(Heathenism) after Allah has brought him out of it, (c) and till Allah and His
Apostle become dearer to him than anything else."
Volume 8, Book 73, Number 68:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zam'a:
The Prophet forbade laughing at a person who passes wind, and said, "How
does anyone of you beat his wife as he beats the stallion camel and then he
may embrace (sleep with) her?" And Hisham said, "As he beats his slave"

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 69:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said at Mina, "Do you know what day is today?" They (the
people) replied, "Allah and His Apostle know better," He said "Today is 10th
of Dhul-Hijja, the sacred (forbidden) day. Do you know what town is this
town?" They (the people) replied, "Allah and His Apostle know better." He
said, "This is the (forbidden) Sacred town (Mecca a sanctuary)." And do you
know which month is this month?" They (the People) replied, "Allah and His
Apostle know better." He said, ''This is the Sacred (forbidden) month ." He
added, "Allah has made your blood, your properties and your honor Sacred
to one another (i.e. Muslims) like the sanctity of this day of yours in this
month of yours, in this town of yours." (See Hadith No. 797, Vol. 2.)

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 70:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "Abusing a Muslim is Fusuq (i.e., an evil-doing), and
killing him is Kufr (disbelief)."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 71:
Narrated Abu Dhar:
That he heard the Prophet saying, "If somebody accuses another of Fusuq
(by calling him 'Fasiq' i.e. a wicked person) or accuses him of Kufr, such an
accusation will revert to him (i.e. the accuser) if his companion (the accused)
is innocent."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 72:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle was neither a Fahish (one who had a bad tongue) nor a
Sabbaba (one who abuses others) and he used to say while admonishing
somebody, "What is wrong with him? May dust be on his forehead!"

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 73:
Narrated Thabit bin Ad-Dahhak:
(who was one of the companions who gave the pledge of allegiance to the
Prophet underneath the tree (Al-Hudaibiya)) Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever
swears by a religion other than Islam (i.e. if somebody swears by saying that
he is a non-Muslim e.g., a Jew or a Christian, etc.) in case he is telling a lie, he
is really so if his oath is false, and a person is not bound to fulfill a vow about
a thing which he does not possess. And if somebody commits suicide with
anything in this world, he will be tortured with that very thing on the Day of
Resurrection; And if somebody curses a believer, then his sin will be as if he
murdered him; And whoever accuses a believer of Kufr (disbelief), then it is
as if he killed him."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 74:
Narrated Sulaiman bin Surad:
A man from the companions of the Prophet said, "Two men abused each
other in front of the Prophet and one of them became angry and his anger
became so intense that his face became swollen and changed. The Prophet
said, "I know a word the saying of which will cause him to relax if he does
say it." Then a man went to him and informed him of the statement of the
Prophet and said, "Seek refuge with Allah from Satan." On that, angry man
said, 'Do you find anything wrong with me? Am I insane? Go away!"

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 75:
Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit:
Allah's Apostle went out to inform the people about the (date of the Night
of decree (Al-Qadr). There happened a quarrel between two Muslim men.
The Prophet said, "I came out to inform you about the Night of Al-Qadr, but
as so-and-so and so-and-so quarrelled, so the news about it had been taken
away; and may be it was better for you. So look for it in the ninth, the
seventh, or the fifth (of the last ten days of Ramadan)."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 76:
Narrated Ma'rur:
I saw Abu Dhar wearing a Burd (garment) and his slave too was wearing a
Burd, so I said (to Abu Dhar), "If you take this (Burda of your slave) and wear
it (along with yours), you will have a nice suit (costume) and you may give
him another garment." Abu Dhar said, "There was a quarrel between me
and another man whose mother was a non-Arab and I called her bad names.
The man mentioned (complained about) me to the Prophet. The Prophet
said, "Did you abuse so-and-so?" I said, "Yes" He said, "Did you call his
mother bad names?" I said, "Yes". He said, "You still have the traits of (the
Pre-lslamic period of) ignorance." I said. "(Do I still have ignorance) even
now in my old age?" He said, "Yes, they (slaves or servants) are your
brothers, and Allah has put them under your command. So the one under
whose hand Allah has put his brother, should feed him of what he eats, and
give him dresses of what he wears, and should not ask him to do a thing
beyond his capacity. And if at all he asks him to do a hard task, he should
help him therein."
Volume 8, Book 73, Number 77:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet led us in the Zuhr prayer, offering only two Rakat and then
(finished it) with Taslim, and went to a piece of wood in front of the mosque
and put his hand over it. Abu Bakr and 'Umar were also present among the
people on that day but dared not talk to him (about his unfinished prayer).
And the hasty people went away, wondering. "Has the prayer been
shortened" Among the people there was a man whom the Prophet used to
call Dhul-Yadain (the longarmed). He said, "O Allah's Prophet! Have you
forgotten or has the prayer been shortened?" The Prophet said, "Neither
have I forgotten, nor has it been shortened." They (the people) said,
"Surely, you have forgotten, O Allah's Apostle!" The Prophet said, DhulYadain has told the truth." So the Prophet got up and offered other two
Rakat and finished his prayer with Taslim. Then he said Takbir, performed a
prostration of ordinary duration or longer, then he raised his head and said
Takbir and performed another prostration of ordinary duration or longer
and then raised his head and said Takbir (i.e. he performed the two
prostrations of Sahu, i.e., forgetfulness)."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 78:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle passed by two graves and said, "Both of them (persons in
the grave) are being tortured, and they are not being tortured for a major
sin. This one used not to save himself from being soiled with his urine, and
the other used to go about with calumnies (among the people to rouse
hostilities, e.g., one goes to a person and tells him that so-and-so says about
him such-and-such evil things). The Prophet then asked for a green leaf of a
date-palm tree, split it into two pieces and planted one on each grave and
said, "It is hoped that their punishment may be abated till those two pieces
of the leaf get dried." (See Hadith No 215, Vol 1).
Volume 8, Book 73, Number 79:
Narrated Abu Usaid As-Sa'idi:
The Prophet said, "The best family among the Ansar is the Banu An-Najjar. "

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 80:
Narrated 'Aisha:
A man asked permission to enter upon Allah's Apostle. The Prophet said,
"Admit him. What an evil brother of his people or a son of his people." But
when the man entered, the Prophet spoke to him in a very polite manner.
(And when that person left) I said, "O Allah's Apostle! You had said what you
had said, yet you spoke to him in a very polite manner?" The Prophet said,
"O 'Aisha! The worst people are those whom the people desert or leave in
order to save themselves from their dirty language or from their
transgression."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 81:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Once the Prophet went through the grave-yards of Medina and heard the
voices of two humans who were being tortured in their graves. The Prophet
said, "They are being punished, but they are not being punished because of
a major sin, yet their sins are great. One of them used not to save himself
from (being soiled with) the urine, and the other used to go about with
calumnies (Namima)." Then the Prophet asked for a green palm tree leaf
and split it into two pieces and placed one piece on each grave, saying, "I
hope that their punishment may be abated as long as these pieces of the
leaf are not dried."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 82:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
I heard the Prophet saying, "A Qattat will not enter Paradise."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 83:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Whoever does not give up false statements (i.e. telling
lies), and evil deeds, and speaking bad words to others, Allah is not in need
of his (fasting) leaving his food and drink."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 84:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The worst people in the Sight of Allah on the Day of
Resurrection will be the double faced people who appear to some people
with one face and to other people with another face."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 85:
Narrated Ibn Mas'ud:
Once Allah's Apostle divided and distributed (the war booty). An Ansar man
said, "By Allah ! Muhammad, by this distribution, did not intend to please
Allah." So I came to Allah's Apostle and informed him about it whereupon
his face became changed with anger and he said, "May Allah bestow His
Mercy on Moses for he was hurt with more than this, yet he remained
patient."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 86:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet heard a man praising another man and he was exaggerating in
his praise. The Prophet said (to him). "You have destroyed (or cut) the back
of the man."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 87:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
A man was mentioned before the Prophet and another man praised him
greatly The Prophet said, "May Allah's Mercy be on you ! You have cut the
neck of your friend." The Prophet repeated this sentence many times and
said, "If it is indispensable for anyone of you to praise someone, then he
should say, 'I think that he is so-and-so," if he really thinks that he is such.
Allah is the One Who will take his accounts (as He knows his reality) and noone can sanctify anybody before Allah." (Khalid said, "Woe to you," instead
of "Allah's Mercy be on you.")

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 88:
Narrated Salim:
that his father said; "When Allah's Apostle mentioned wh at he mentioned
about (the hanging of) the Izar (waist sheet), Abu Bakr said, "O Allah's
Apostle! My Izar slackens on one side (without my intention)." The Prophet
said, "You are not among those (who, out of pride) drag their Izars behind
them."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 89:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet continued for such-and-such period imagining that he has slept
(had sexual relations) with his wives, and in fact he did not. One day he said,
to me, "O 'Aisha! Allah has instructed me regarding a matter about which I
had asked Him. There came to me two men, one of them sat near my feet
and the other near my head. The one near my feet, asked the one near my
head (pointing at me), 'What is wrong with this man? The latter replied, 'He
is under the effect of magic.' The first one asked, 'Who had worked magic
on him?' The other replied, 'Lubaid bin Asam.' The first one asked, 'What
material (did he use)?' The other replied, 'The skin of the pollen of a male
date tree with a comb and the hair stuck to it, kept under a stone in the well
of Dharwan."' Then the Prophet went to that well and said, "This is the same
well which was shown to me in the dream. The tops of its date-palm trees
look like the heads of the devils, and its water looks like the Henna infusion."
Then the Prophet ordered that those things be taken out. I said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Won't you disclose (the magic object)?" The Prophet said, "Allah
has cured me and I hate to circulate the evil among the people." 'Aisha
added, "(The magician) Lubaid bin Asam was a man from Bani Zuraiq, an ally
of the Jews."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 90:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Beware of suspicion, for suspicion is the worst of false
tales; and do not look for the others' faults and do not spy, and do not be
jealous of one another, and do not desert (cut your relation with) one
another, and do not hate one another; and O Allah's worshipers! Be
brothers (as Allah has ordered you!")

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 91:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "Do not hate one another, and do not be jealous of one
another, and do not desert each other, and O, Allah's worshipers! Be
brothers. Lo! It is not permissible for any Muslim to desert (not talk to) his
brother (Muslim) for more than three days."
Volume 8, Book 73, Number 92:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Beware of suspicion, for suspicion is the worst of false
tales. and do not look for the others' faults, and do not do spying on one
another, and do not practice Najsh, and do not be jealous of one another
and do not hate one another, and do not desert (stop talking to) one
another. And O, Allah's worshipers! Be brothers!"

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 93:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "I do not think that so-and-so and so-and-so know
anything of our religion." (And Al-Laith said, "These two persons were
among the hypocrites.")

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 94:
Narrated Al-Laith:
'Aisha said "The Prophet entered upon me one day and said, 'O 'Aisha! I do
not think that so-and-so and so-and-so know anything of our religion which
we follow."'

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 95:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying. "All the sins of my followers will be forgiven
except those of the Mujahirin (those who commit a sin openly or disclose
their sins to the people). An example of such disclosure is that a person
commits a sin at night and though Allah screens it from the public, then he
comes in the morning, and says, 'O so-and-so, I did such-and-such (evil) deed
yesterday,' though he spent his night screened by his Lord (none knowing
about his sin) and in the morning he removes Allah's screen from himself."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 96:
Narrated Safwan bin Muhriz:
A man asked Ibn 'Umar, "What did you hear Allah's Apostle saying regarding
An-Najwa (secret talk between Allah and His believing worshipper on the
Day of Judgment)?" He said, "(The Prophet said), "One of you will come
close to his Lord till He will shelter him in His screen and say: Did you commit
such-and-such sin? He will say, 'Yes.' Then Allah will say: Did you commit such
and such sin? He will say, 'Yes.' So Allah will make him confess (all his sins)
and He will say, 'I screened them (your sins) for you in the world, and today I
forgive them for you."'

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 97:
Narrated Haritha bin Wahb:
Al-Khuzai: The Prophet said, "Shall I inform you about the people of
Paradise? They comprise every obscure unimportant humble person, and if
he takes Allah's Oath that he will do that thing, Allah will fulfill his oath (by
doing that). Shall I inform you about the people of the Fire? They comprise
every cruel, violent, proud and conceited person." Anas bin Malik said, "Any
of the female slaves of Medina could take hold of the hand of Allah's
Apostle and take him wherever she wished."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 98:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) that she was told that 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair (on
hearing that she was selling or giving something as a gift) said, "By Allah, if
'Aisha does not give up this, I will declare her incompetent to dispose of her
wealth." I said, "Did he ('Abdullah bin Az-Zubair) say so?" They (people) said,
"Yes." 'Aisha said, "I vow to Allah that I will never speak to Ibn Az-Zubair."
When this desertion lasted long, 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair sought intercession
with her, but she said, "By Allah, I will not accept the intercession of anyone
for him, and will not commit a sin by breaking my vow." When this state of
affairs was prolonged on Ibn Az-Zubair (he felt it hard on him), he said to AlMiswar bin Makhrama and 'Abdur-Rahman bin Al-Aswad bin 'Abu Yaghuth,
who were from the tribe of Bani Zahra, "I beseech you, by Allah, to let me
enter upon 'Aisha, for it is unlawful for her to vow to cut the relation with
me." So Al-Miswar and 'Abdur-Rahman, wrapping their sheets around
themselves, asked 'Aisha's permission saying, "Peace and Allah's Mercy and
Blessings be upon you! Shall we come in?" 'Aisha said, "Come in." They said,
"All of us?" She said, "Yes, come in all of you," not knowing that Ibn AzZubair was also with them. So when they entered, Ibn Az-Zubair entered the
screened place and got hold of 'Aisha and started requesting her to excuse
him, and wept. Al-Miswar and 'Abdur Rahman also started requesting her to
speak to him and to accept his repentance. They said (to her), "The Prophet
forbade what you know of deserting (not speaking to your Muslim
Brethren), for it is unlawful for any Muslim not to talk to his brother for
more than three nights (days)." So when they increased their reminding her
(of the superiority of having good relation with Kith and kin, and of excusing
others' sins), and brought her down to a critical situation, she started
reminding them, and wept, saying, "I have made a vow, and (the question
of) vow is a difficult one." They (Al-Miswar and 'Abdur-Rahman) persisted in
their appeal till she spoke with 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair and she manumitted
forty slaves as an expiation for her vow. Later on, whenever she
remembered her vow, she used to weep so much that her veil used to
become wet with her tears.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 99:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "Do not hate one another, nor be jealous of one
another; and do not desert one another, but O Allah's worshipers! Be
Brothers! And it is unlawful for a Muslim to desert his brother Muslim (and
not to talk to him) for more than three nights."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 100:
Narrated Abu Aiyub Al-Ansari:
Allah's Apostle said, "It is not lawful for a man to desert his brother Muslim
for more than three nights. (It is unlawful for them that) when they meet,
one of them turns his face away from the other, and the other turns his face
from the former, and the better of the two will be the one who greets the
other first."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 101:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said, " I know whether you are angry or pleased." I said,
"How do you know that, Allah's Apostle?" He said, "When you are pleased,
you say, "Yes, by the Lord of Muhammad,' but when you are angry, you say,
'No, by the Lord of Abraham!' " I said, "Yes, I do not leave, except your
name."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 102:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) "I do not remember my parents believing in any
religion other than the Religion (of Islam), and our being visited by Allah's
Apostle in the morning and in the evening. One day, while we were sitting in
the house of Abu Bakr (my father) at noon, someone said, 'This is Allah's
Apostle coming at an hour at which he never used to visit us.' Abu Bakr said,
'There must be something very urgent that has brought him at this hour.'
The Prophet said, 'I have been allowed to go out (of Mecca) to migrate.' "
Volume 8, Book 73, Number 103:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle visited a household among the Ansars, and he took a meal
with them. When he intended to leave, he asked for a place in that house for
him, to pray so a mat sprinkled with water was put and he offered prayer
over it, and invoked for Allah's Blessing upon them (his hosts).

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 104:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
'Umar saw a silken cloak over a man (for sale) so he took it to the Prophet
and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Buy this and wear it when the delegate come to
you.' He said, 'The silk is worn by one who will have no share (in the Hereafter).' Some time passed after this event, and then the Prophet sent a
(similar) cloak to him. 'Umar brought that cloak back to the Prophet and
said, 'You have sent this to me, and you said about a similar one what you
said?' The Prophet said, 'I have sent it to you so that you may get money by
selling it.' Because of this, Ibn 'Umar used to hate the silken markings on the
garments.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 105:
Narrated Anas:
When 'Abdur-Rahman came to us, the Prophet established a bond of
brotherhood between him and Sa'd bin Ar-Rabi'. Once the Prophet said, "As
you (O 'Abdur-Rahman) have married, give a wedding banquet even if with
one sheep."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 106:
Narrated 'Asim:
I said to Anas bin Malik, "Did it reach you that the Prophet said, "There is no
treaty of brotherhood in Islam'?" Anas said, "The Prophet made a treaty (of
brotherhood) between the Ansar and the Quraish in my home."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 107:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Rifa'a Al-Qurazi divorced his wife irrevocably (i.e. that divorce was the final).
Later on 'Abdur-Rahman bin Az-Zubair married her after him. She came to
the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I was Rifa'a's wife and he divorced
me thrice, and then I was married to 'Abdur-Rahman bin AzZubair, who, by
Allah has nothing with him except something like this fringe, O Allah's
Apostle," showing a fringe she had taken from her covering sheet. Abu Bakr
was sitting with the Prophet while Khalid Ibn Said bin Al-As was sitting at the
gate of the room waiting for admission. Khalid started calling Abu Bakr, "O
Abu Bakr! Why don't you reprove this lady from what she is openly saying
before Allah's Apostle?" Allah's Apostle did nothing except smiling, and then
said (to the lady), "Perhaps you want to go back to Rifa'a? No, (it is not
possible), unless and until you enjoy the sexual relation with him ('Abdur
Rahman), and he enjoys the sexual relation with you."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 108:
Narrated Sa'd:
'Umar bin Al-Khattab asked permission of Allah's Apostle to see him while
some Quraishi women were sitting with him and they were asking him to
give them more financial support while raising their voices over the voice of
the Prophet. When 'Umar asked permission to enter, all of them hurried to
screen themselves the Prophet admitted 'Umar and he entered, while the
Prophet was smiling. 'Umar said, "May Allah always keep you smiling, O
Allah's Apostle! Let my father and mother be sacrificed for you !" The
Prophet said, "I am astonished at these women who were with me. As soon
as they heard your voice, they hastened to screen themselves." 'Umar said,
"You have more right, that they should be afraid of you, O Allah's Apostle!"
And then he ('Umar) turned towards them and said, "O enemies of your
souls! You are afraid of me and not of Allah's Apostle?" The women replied,
"Yes, for you are sterner and harsher than Allah's Apostle." Allah's Apostle
said, "O Ibn Al-Khattab! By Him in Whose Hands my life is, whenever Satan
sees you taking a way, he follows a way other than yours!"

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 109:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
When Allah Apostle was in Ta'if (trying to conquer it), he said to his
companions, "Tomorrow we will return (to Medina), if Allah wills." Some of
the companions of Allah's Apostle said, "We will not leave till we conquer
it." The Prophet said, "Therefore, be ready to fight tomorrow." On the
following day, they (Muslims) fought fiercely (with the people of Ta'if) and
suffered many wounds. Then Allah's Apostle said, "Tomorrow we will return
(to Medina), if Allah wills." His companions kept quiet this time. Allah's
Apostle then smiled.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 110:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man came to the Prophet and said, "I have been ruined for I have had
sexual relation with my wife in Ramadan (while I was fasting)" The Prophet
said (to him), "Manumit a slave." The man said, " I cannot afford that." The
Prophet said, "(Then) fast for two successive months continuously". The
man said, "I cannot do that." The Prophet said, "(Then) feed sixty poor
persons." The man said, "I have nothing (to feed them with)." Then a big
basket full of dates was brought to the Prophet. The Prophet said, "Where is
the questioner? Go and give this in charity." The man said, "(Shall I give this
in charity) to a poorer person than l? By Allah, there is no family in between
these two mountains (of Medina) who are poorer than we." The Prophet
then smiled till his premolar teeth became visible, and said, "Then (feed)
your (family with it).

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 111:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
While I was going along with Allah's Apostle who was wearing a Najrani
Burd (sheet) with a thick border, a bedouin overtook the Prophet and pulled
his Rida' (sheet) forcibly. I looked at the side of the shoulder of the Prophet
and noticed that the edge of the Rida' had left a mark on it because of the
violence of his pull. The bedouin said, "O Muhammad! Order for me some of
Allah's property which you have." The Prophet turned towards him, (smiled)
and ordered that he be given something.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 112:
Narrated Jarir:
The Prophet did not screen himself from me (had never prevented me from
entering upon him) since I embraced Islam, and whenever he saw me, he
would receive me with a smile. Once I told him that I could not sit firm on
horses. He stroked me on the chest with his hand, and said, "O Allah! Make
him firm and make him a guiding and a rightly guided man.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 113:
Narrated Zainab bint Um Salama:
Um Sulaim said, "O Allah's Apostle! Verily Allah is not shy of (telling you) the
truth. Is it essential for a woman to take a bath after she had a wet dream
(nocturnal sexual discharge)?" He said, "Yes, if she notices discharge. On
that Um Salama laughed and said, "Does a woman get a (nocturnal sexual)
discharge?" He said, "How then does (her) son resemble her (his mother)?"
Volume 8, Book 73, Number 114:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I never saw the Prophet laughing to an extent that one could see his palate,
but he always used to smile only.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 115:
Narrated Anas:
A man came to the Prophet on a Friday while he (the Prophet) was
delivering a sermon at Medina, and said, "There is lack of rain, so please
invoke your Lord to bless us with the rain." The Prophet looked at the sky
when no cloud could be detected. Then he invoked Allah for rain. Clouds
started gathering together and it rained till the Medina valleys started
flowing with water. It continued raining till the next Friday. Then that man
(or some other man) stood up while the Prophet was delivering the Friday
sermon, and said, "We are drowned; Please invoke your Lord to withhold it
(rain) from us" The Prophet smiled and said twice or thrice, "O Allah! Please
let it rain round about us and not upon us." The clouds started dispersing
over Medina to the right and to the left, and it rained round about Medina
and not upon Medina. Allah showed them (the people) the miracle of His
Prophet and His response to his invocation.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 116:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "Truthfulness leads to righteousness, and righteousness
leads to Paradise. And a man keeps on telling the truth until he becomes a
truthful person. Falsehood leads to Al-Fajur (i.e. wickedness, evil-doing), and
Al-Fajur (wickedness) leads to the (Hell) Fire, and a man may keep on telling
lies till he is written before Allah, a liar."
Volume 8, Book 73, Number 117:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The signs of a hypocrite are three: Whenever he
speaks, he tells a lie; and whenever he promises, he breaks his promise; and
whenever he is entrusted, he betrays (proves to be dishonest)".

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 118:
Narrated Samura bin Jundub:
The Prophet said, "I saw (in a dream), two men came to me." Then the
Prophet narrated the story (saying), "They said, 'The person, the one whose
cheek you saw being torn away (from the mouth to the ear) was a liar and
used to tell lies and the people would report those lies on his authority till
they spread all over the world. So he will be punished like that till the Day of
Resurrection."'

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 119:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
From among the people, Ibn Um 'Abd greatly resembled Allah's Apostles in
solemn gate and good appearance of piety and in calmness and sobriety
from the time he goes out of his house till he returns to it. But we do not
know how he behaves with his family when he is alone with them.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 120:
Narrated Tariq:
'Abdullah said, "The best talk is Allah's Book (Qur'an), and the best guidance
is the guidance of Muhammad."
Volume 8, Book 73, Number 121:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said: None is more patient than Allah against the harmful
saying. He hears from the people they ascribe children to Him, yet He gives
them health and (supplies them with) provision."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 122:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet divided and distributed something as he used to do for some of
his distributions. A man from the Ansar said, "By Allah, in this division the
pleasure of Allah has not been intended." I said, "I will definitely tell this to
the Prophet ." So I went to him while he was sitting with his companions
and told him of it secretly. That was hard upon the Prophet and the color of
his face changed, and he became so angry that I wished I had not told him.
The Prophet then said, "Moses was harmed with more than this, yet he
remained patient."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 123:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet did something and allowed his people to do it, but some people
refrained from doing it. When the Prophet learned of that, he delivered a
sermon, and after having sent Praises to Allah, he said, "What is wrong with
such people as refrain from doing a thing that I do? By Allah, I know Allah
better than they, and I am more afraid of Him than they."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 124:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The Prophet was more shy than a virgin in her separate room. And if he saw
a thing which he disliked, we would recognize that (feeling) in his face.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 125d:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If a man says to his brother, O Kafir (disbeliever)!' Then
surely one of them is such (i.e., a Kifir). "

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 125m:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, 'If anyone says to his brother, 'O misbeliever! Then
surely, one of them such."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 126:
Narrated Thabit bin Ad-Dahhak:
The Prophet said, "Whoever swears by a religion other than Islam (i.e. if he
swears by saying that he is a non-Muslim in case he is telling a lie), then he is
as he says if his oath is false and whoever commits suicide with something,
will be punished with the same thing in the (Hell) fire, and cursing a believer
is like murdering him, and whoever accuses a believer of disbelief, then it is
as if he had killed him."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 127:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Mu'adh bin Jabal used to pray with the Prophet and then go to lead his
people in prayer. Once he led the people in prayer and recited Surat-alBaqara. A man left (the row of the praying people) and offered (light) prayer
(separately) and went away. When Mu'adh came to know about it, he said.
"He (that man) is a hypocrite." Later that man heard what Mu'adh said
about him, so he came to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! We are
people who work with our own hands and irrigate (our farms) with our
camels. Last night Mu'adh led us in the (night) prayer and he recited Sura-alBaqara, so I offered my prayer separately, and because of that, he accused
me of being a hypocrite." The Prophet called Mu'adh and said thrice, "O
Mu'adh! You are putting the people to trials? Recite 'Wash-shamsi waduhaha' (91) or'Sabbih isma Rabbi ka-l-A'la' (87) or the like."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 128:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said: "Whoever amongst you swears, (saying by error) in his
oath 'By Al-Lat and Al-Uzza', then he should say, 'None has the right to be
worshipped but Allah.' And whoever says to his companions, 'Come let me
gamble' with you, then he must give something in charity (as an expiation
for such a sin)." (See Hadith No. 645)

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 129:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
that he found 'Umar bin Al-Khattab in a group of people and he was
swearing by his father. So Allah's Apostle called them, saying, "Verily! Allah
forbids you to swear by your fathers. If one has to take an oath, he should
swear by Allah or otherwise keep quiet."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 130:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet entered upon me while there was a curtain having pictures (of
animals) in the house. His face got red with anger, and then he got hold of
the curtain and tore it into pieces. The Prophet said, "Such people as paint
these pictures will receive the severest punishment on the Day of
Resurrection ."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 131:
Narrated Abu Mas'ud:
A man came to the Prophet and said "I keep away from the morning prayer
only because such and such person prolongs the prayer when he leads us in
it. The narrator added: I had never seen Allah's Apostle more furious in
giving advice than he was on that day. He said, "O people! There are some
among you who make others dislike good deeds) cause the others to have
aversion (to congregational prayers). Beware! Whoever among you leads
the people in prayer should not prolong it, because among them there are
the sick, the old, and the needy." (See Hadith No. 670, Vol 1)

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 132:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
While the Prophet was praying, he saw sputum (on the wall) of the mosque,
in the direction of the Qibla, and so he scraped it off with his hand, and the
sign of disgust (was apparent from his face) and then said, "Whenever
anyone of you is in prayer, he should not spit in front of him (in prayer)
because Allah is in front of him."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 133:
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani:
A man asked Allah's Apostle about "Al-Luqata" (a lost fallen purse or a thing
picked up by somebody). The Prophet said, "You should announce it publicly
for one year, and then remember and recognize the tying material of its
container, and then you can spend it. If its owner came to you, then you
should pay him its equivalent." The man said, "O Allah's Apostle! What about
a lost sheep?" The Prophet said, "Take it because it is for you, for your
brother, or for the wolf." The man again said, "O Allah's Apostle! What
about a lost camel?" Allah's Apostle became very angry and furious and his
cheeks became red (or his face became red), and he said, "You have nothing
to do with it (the camel) for it has its food and its water container with it till
it meets its owner."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 134:
Narrated Zaid bin Thabit:
Allah's Apostle made a small room (with a palm leaf mat). Allah's Apostle
came out (of his house) and prayed in it. Some men came and joined him in
his prayer. Then again the next night they came for the prayer, but Allah's
Apostle delayed and did not come out to them. So they raised their voices
and knocked the door with small stones (to draw his attention). He came
out to them in a state of anger, saying, "You are still insisting (on your deed,
i.e. Tarawih prayer in the mosque) that I thought that this prayer (Tarawih)
might become obligatory on you. So you people, offer this prayer at your
homes, for the best prayer of a person is the one which he offers at home,
except the compulsory (congregational) prayer."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 135:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The strong is not the one who overcomes the people
by his strength, but the strong is the one who controls himself while in
anger."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 136:
Narrated Sulaiman bin Sarad:
Two men abused each other in front of the Prophet while we were sitting
with him. One of the two abused his companion furiously and his face
became red. The Prophet said, "I know a word (sentence) the saying of
which will cause him to relax if this man says it. Only if he said, "I seek refuge
with Allah from Satan, the outcast.' " So they said to that (furious) man,
'Don't you hear what the Prophet is saying?" He said, "I am not mad."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 137:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man said to the Prophet , "Advise me! "The Prophet said, "Do not become
angry and furious." The man asked (the same) again and again, and the
Prophet said in each case, "Do not become angry and furious."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 138:
Narrated Abu As-Sawar Al-Adawi:
'Imran bin Husain said, "The Prophet said, 'Haya' does not bring anything
except good." Thereupon Bashir bin Ka'b said, 'It is written in the wisdom
paper: Haya leads to solemnity; Haya leads to tranquility (peace of mind)."
'Imran said to him, "I am narrating to you the saying of Allah's Apostle and
you are speaking about your paper (wisdom book)?"

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 139:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
The Prophet passed by a man who was admonishing his brother regarding
Haya and was saying, "You are very shy, and I am afraid that might harm
you." On that, Allah's Apostle said, "Leave him, for Haya is (a part) of Faith."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 140:
Narrated Abu Said:
The Prophet was shier than a veiled virgin girl. (See Hadith No. 762, Vol. 4)

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 141:
Narrated Abu Mas'ud:
The Prophet said, 'One of the sayings of the early Prophets which the people
have got is: If you don't feel ashamed do whatever you like." (See Hadith No
690, 691, Vol 4)

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 142:
Narrated Um Salama:
Um Sulaim came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Verily, Allah
does not feel shy to tell the truth. If a woman gets a nocturnal sexual
discharge (has a wet dream), is it essential for her to take a bath? He replied,
"Yes if she notices a discharge."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 143:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "The example of a believer is like a green tree, the leaves
of which do not fall." The people said. "It is such-and-such tree: It is suchand-such tree." I intended to say that it was the datepalm tree, but I was a
young boy and felt shy (to answer). The Prophet said, "It is the date-palm
tree." Ibn 'Umar added, " I told that to 'Umar who said, 'Had you said it, I
would have preferred it to such-and such a thing."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 144:
Narrated Thabit:
that he heard Anas saying, "A woman came to the Prophet offering herself
to him in marriage, saying, "Have you got any interest in me (i.e. would you
like to marry me?)" Anas's daughter said, "How shameless that woman
was!" On that Anas said, "She is better than you for, she presented herself
to Allah's Apostle (for marriage)."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 145:
Narrated Abu Musa:
that when Allah's Apostle sent him and Mu'adh bin Jabal to Yemen, he said
to them, "Facilitate things for the people (treat the people in the most
agreeable way), and do not make things difficult for them, and give them
glad tidings, and let them not have aversion (i.e. to make the people hate
good deeds) and you should both work in cooperation and mutual
understanding, obey each other." Abu Musa said, "O Allah's Apostle! We are
in a land in which a drink named Al Bit' is prepared from honey, and another
drink named Al-Mizr is prepared from barley." On that, Allah's Apostle said,
"All intoxicants (i.e. all alcoholic drinks) are prohibited."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 146:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "Make things easy for the people, and do not make it
difficult for them, and make them calm (with glad tidings) and do not
repulse (them )."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 147:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Whenever Allah's Apostle was given the choice of one of two matters he
would choose the easier of the two as long as it was not sinful to do so, but
if it was sinful, he would not approach it. Allah's Apostle never took revenge
over anybody for his own sake but (he did) only when Allah's legal bindings
were outraged, in which case he would take revenge for Allah's sake." (See
Hadith No. 760. Vol. 4)

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 148:
Narrated Al-Azraq bin Qais:
We were in the city of Al-Ahwaz on the bank of a river which had dried up.
Then Abu Barza Al-Aslami came riding a horse and he started praying and let
his horse loose. The horse ran away, so Abu Barza interrupted his prayer and
went after the horse till he caught it and brought it, and then he offered his
prayer. There was a man amongst us who was (from the Khawari) having a
different opinion. He came saying. "Look at this old man! He left his prayer
because of a horse." On that Abu Barza came to us and said, "Since the time
I left Allah's Apostle, nobody has admonished me; My house is very far from
this place, and if I had carried on praying and left my horse, I could not have
reached my house till night." Then Abu Barza mentioned that he had been in
the company of the Prophet, and that he had seen his leniency.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 149:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A bedouin urinated in the mosque, and the people rushed to beat him.
Allah's Apostle ordered them to leave him and pour a bucket or a tumbler
(full) of water over the place where he has passed urine. The Prophet then
said, " You have been sent to make things easy (for the people) and you
have not been sent to make things difficult for them."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 150:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet used to mix with us to the extent that he would say to a
younger brother of mine, 'O father of 'Umar! What did the Nughair (a kind of
bird) do?"

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 151:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I used to play with the dolls in the presence of the Prophet, and my girl
friends also used to play with me. When Allah's Apostle used to enter (my
dwelling place) they used to hide themselves, but the Prophet would call
them to join and play with me. (The playing with the dolls and similar images
is forbidden, but it was allowed for 'Aisha at that time, as she was a little girl,
not yet reached the age of puberty.) (Fateh-al-Bari page 143, Vol.13)

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 152:
Narrated Aisha:
A man asked permission to see the Prophet. He said, "Let Him come in;
What an evil man of the tribe he is! (Or, What an evil brother of the tribe he
is)."
But when he entered, the Prophet spoke to him gently in a polite manner. I
said to him, "O Allah's Apostle! You have said what you have said, then you
spoke to him in a very gentle and polite manner? The Prophet said, "The
worse people, in the sight of Allah are those whom the people leave
(undisturbed) to save themselves from their dirty language."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 153:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Mulaika:
The Prophet was given a gift of a few silken cloaks with gold buttons. He
distributed them amongst some of his companions and put aside one of
them for Makhrama. When Makhrama came, the Prophet said, "I kept this
for you." (Aiyub, the sub-narrator held his garment to show how the
Prophet showed the cloak to Makhrama who had something unfavorable
about his temper.)

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 154:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "A believer is not stung twice (by something) out of one
and the same hole."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 155:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
Allah's Apostle entered upon me and said, "Have I not been informed that
you offer prayer all the night and fast the whole day?" I said, "Yes." He said,
"Do not do so; Offer prayer at night and also sleep; Fast for a few days and
give up fasting for a few days because your body has a right on you, and
your eye has a right on you, and your guest has a right on you, and your wife
has a right on you. I hope that you will have a long life, and it is sufficient for
you to fast for three days a month as the reward of a good deed, is
multiplied ten times, that means, as if you fasted the whole year." I insisted
(on fasting more) so I was given a hard instruction. I said, "I can do more
than that (fasting)" The Prophet said, "Fast three days every week." But as I
insisted (on fasting more) so I was burdened. I said, "I can fast more than
that." The Prophet said, "Fast as Allah's prophet David used to fast." I said,
"How was the fasting of the prophet David?" The Prophet said, "One half of
a year (i.e. he used to fast on alternate days). '

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 156:
Narrated Abu Shuraih Al-Ka'bi:
Allah's Apostle said, Whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day, should
serve his guest generously. The guest's reward is: To provide him with a
superior type of food for a night and a day and a guest is to be entertained
with food for three days, and whatever is offered beyond that, is regarded
as something given in charity. And it is not lawful for a guest to stay with his
host for such a long period so as to put him in a critical position."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 157:
Narrated Malik:
Similarly as above (156) adding, "Who believes in Allah and the Last Day
should talk what is good or keep quiet." (i.e. abstain from dirty and evil talk,
and should think before uttering).

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 158:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day, should not
hurt his neighbor and whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day, should
serve his guest generously and whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day,
should talk what is good or keep quiet."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 159:
Narrated Uqba bin 'Amir:
We said, "O Allah's Apostle! You send us out and it happens that we have to
stay with such people as do not entertain us. What do you think about it?"
Allah's Apostle said to us, "If you stay with some people and they entertain
you as they should for a guest, accept is; but if they do not do then you
should take from them the right of the guest, which they ought to give."
Volume 8, Book 73, Number 160:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day, should serve
his guest generously; and whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day, should
unite the bond of kinship (i.e. keep good relation with his Kith and kin); and
whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day, should talk what is good or keep
quit. "

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 161:
Narrated Abu Juhaifa:
The Prophet established a bond of brotherhood between Salman and Abu
Darda'. Salman paid a visit to Abu ad-Darda and found Um Ad-Darda'
dressed in shabby clothes and asked her why she was in that state.?" She
replied, "Your brother, Abu Ad-Darda is not interested in the luxuries of this
world." In the meantime Abu Ad-Darda came and prepared a meal for him
(Salman), and said to him, "(Please) eat for I am fasting." Salman said, "I am
not going to eat, unless you eat." So Abu Ad-Darda' ate. When it was night,
Abu Ad-Darda' got up (for the night prayer). Salman said (to him), "Sleep,"
and he slept. Again Abu-Ad-Darda' got up (for the prayer), and Salman said
(to him), "Sleep." When it was the last part of the night, Salman said to him,
"Get up now (for the prayer)." So both of them offered their prayers and
Salman said to Abu Ad-Darda',"Your Lord has a right on you; and your soul
has a right on you; and your family has a right on you; so you should give the
rights of all those who have a right on you). Later on Abu Ad-Darda' visited
the Prophet and mentioned that to him. The Prophet, said, "Salman has
spoken the truth."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 162:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr:
Abu Bakr invited a group of people and told me, "Look after your guests."
Abu Bakr added, I am going to visit the Prophet and you should finish
serving them before I return." 'Abdur-Rahman said, So I went at once and
served them with what was available at that time in the house and
requested them to eat." They said, "Where is the owner of the house (i.e.,
Abu Bakr)?" 'Abdur-Rahman said, "Take your meal." They said, "We will not
eat till the owner of the house comes." 'Abdur-Rahman said, "Accept your
meal from us, for if my father comes and finds you not having taken your
meal yet, we will be blamed severely by him, but they refused to take their
meals . So I was sure that my father would be angry with me. When he
came, I went away (to hide myself) from him. He asked, "What have you
done (about the guests)?" They informed him the whole story. Abu Bakr
called, "O 'Abdur Rahman!" I kept quiet. He then called again. "O 'AbdurRahman!" I kept quiet and he called again, "O ignorant (boy)! I beseech you
by Allah, if you hear my voice, then come out!" I came out and said, "Please
ask your guests (and do not be angry with me)." They said, "He has told the
truth; he brought the meal to us." He said, "As you have been waiting for
me, by Allah, I will not eat of it tonight." They said, "By Allah, we will not eat
of it till you eat of it." He said, I have never seen a night like this night in evil.
What is wrong with you? Why don't you accept your meals of hospitality
from us?" (He said to me), "Bring your meal." I brought it to him, and he put
his hand in it, saying, "In the name of Allah. The first (state of fury) was
because of Satan." So Abu Bakr ate and so did his guests.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 163:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr:
Abu Bakr came with a guest or some guests, but he stayed late at night with
the Prophet and when he came, my mother said (to him), "Have you been
detained from your guest or guests tonight?" He said, "Haven't you served
the supper to them?" She replied, "We presented the meal to him (or to
them), but he (or they) refused to eat." Abu Bakr became angry, rebuked
me and invoked Allah to cause (my) ears to be cut and swore not to eat of
it!" I hid myself, and he called me, "O ignorant (boy)!" Abu Bakr's wife swore
that she would not eat of it and so the guests or the guest swore that they
would not eat of it till he ate of it. Abu Bakr said, "All that happened was
from Satan." So he asked for the meals and ate of it, and so did they.
Whenever they took a handful of the meal, the meal grew (increased) from
underneath more than that mouthful. He said (to his wife), "O, sister of Bani
Firas! What is this?" She said, "O, pleasure of my eyes! The meal is now more
than it had been before we started eating'' So they ate of it and sent the
rest of that meal to the Prophet. It is said that the Prophet also ate of it.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 164:
Narrated Rafi bin Khadij and Sahl bin Abu Hathma:
'Abdullah bin Sahl and Muhaiyisa bin Mas'ud went to Khaibar and they
dispersed in the gardens of the date-palm trees. 'Abdullah bin Sahl was
murdered. Then 'Abdur-Rahman bin Sahl, Huwaiyisa and Muhaiyisa, the two
sons of Mas'ud, came to the Prophet and spoke about the case of their
(murdered) friend. 'Abdur-Rahman who was the youngest of them all,
started talking. The Prophet said, "Let the older (among you) speak first."
So they spoke about the case of their (murdered) friend. The Prophet said,
"Will fifty of you take an oath whereby you will have the right to receive the
blood money of your murdered man," (or said, "..your companion"). They
said, "O Allah's Apostle! The murder was a thing we did not witness." The
Prophet said, "Then the Jews will release you from the oath, if fifty of them
(the Jews) should take an oath to contradict your claim." They said, "O
Allah's Apostle! They are disbelievers (and they will take a false oath)." Then
Allah's Apostle himself paid the blood money to them.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 165:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Inform me of a tree which resembles a Muslim, giving
its fruits at every season by the permission of its Lord, and the leaves of
which do not fall." I thought of the date-palm tree, but I disliked to speak
because Abu Bakr and 'Umar were present there. When nobody spoke, the
Prophet said, "It is the date-palm tree" When I came out with my father, I
said, "O father! It came to my mind that it was the date-palm tree." He said,
"What prevented you from saying it?" Had you said it, it would have been
more dearer to me than such-and-such a thing (fortune)." I said, "Nothing
prevented me but the fact that neither you nor Abu Bakr spoke, so I disliked
to speak (in your presence)."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 166:
Narrated Ubai bin Ka'b:
Allah's Apostle said, "Some poetry contains wisdom."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 167:
Narrated Jundub:
While the Prophet was walking, a stone hit his foot and stumbled and his toe
was injured. He then (quoting a poetic verse) said, "You are not more than a
toe which

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 168:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The most true words said by a poet were the words of
Labid. He said, i.e. 'Verily, everything except Allah is perishable and Umaiya
bin Abi As-Salt was about to embrace Islam '

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 169:
Narrated Salama bin Al-Aqwa:
We went out with Allah's Apostle to Khaibar and we travelled during the
night. A man amongst the people said to 'Amir bin Al-Aqwa', "Won't you let
us hear your poetry?" 'Amir was a poet, and so he got down and started
(chanting Huda) reciting for the people, poetry that keep pace with the
camel's foot steps, saying, "O Allah! Without You we would not have been
guided on the right path, neither would we have given in charity, nor would
we have prayed. So please forgive us what we have committed. Let all of us
be sacrificed for Your cause and when we meet our enemy, make our feet
firm and bestow peace and calmness on us and if they (our enemy) will call
us towards an unjust thing we will refuse.
The infidels have made a hue and cry to ask others help against us. Allah's
Apostle said, "Who is that driver (of the camels)?" They said, "He is 'Amir bin
Al-Aqwa."' He said, "May Allah bestow His mercy on him." A man among the
people said, Has Martyrdom been granted to him, O Allah's Prophet! Would
that you let us enjoy his company longer." We reached (the people of)
Khaibar and besieged them till we were stricken with severe hunger but
Allah helped the Muslims conquer Khaibar. In the evening of its conquest
the people made many fires. Allah's Apostle asked, "What are those fires?
For what are you making fires?" They said, "For cooking meat." He asked,
"What kind of meat?" They said, "Donkeys' meat." Allah's Apostle said,
"Throw away the meat and break the cooking pots." A man said, O Allah's
Apostle! Shall we throw away the meat and wash the cooking pots?" He
said, "You can do that too." When the army files aligned in rows (for the
battle), 'Amir's sword was a short one, and while attacking a Jew with it in
order to hit him, the sharp edge of the sword turned back and hit 'Amir's
knee and caused him to die.
When the Muslims returned (from the battle), Salama said, Allah's Apostle
saw me pale and said, 'What is wrong with you?"' I said, "Let my parents be
sacrificed for you! The people claim that all the deeds of Amir have been
annulled." The Prophet asked, "Who said so?" I replied, "So-and-so and soand-so and Usaid bin Al-Hudair Al-Ansari said, 'Whoever says so is telling a
lie. Verily, 'Amir will have double reward."' (While speaking) the Prophet put
two of his fingers together to indicate that, and added, "He was really a
hard-working man and a Mujahid (devout fighter in Allah's Cause) and rarely
have there lived in it (i.e., Medina or the battle-field) an "Arab like him."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 170:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet came to some of his wives among whom there was Um Sulaim,
and said, "May Allah be merciful to you, O Anjasha! Drive the camels slowly,
as they are carrying glass vessels!" Abu Qalaba said, "The Prophet said a
sentence (i.e. the above metaphor) which, had anyone of you said it, you
would have admonished him for it".

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 171:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Hassan bin Thabit asked the permission of Allah's Apostle to lampoon the
pagans (in verse). Allah's Apostle said, "What about my fore-fathers
(ancestry)?' Hassan said (to the Prophet) "I will take you out of them as a
hair is taken out of dough."
Narrated Hisham bin 'Urwa that his father said, "I called Hassan with bad
names in front of 'Aisha." She said, "Don't call him with bad names because
he used to defend Allah's Apostle (against the pagans)."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 172:
Narrated Al-Haitham bin Abu Sinan:
that he heard Abu Huraira in his narration, mentioning that the Prophet said,
"A Muslim brother of yours who does not say dirty words." and by that he
meant Ibn Rawaha, "said (in verse): 'We have Allah's Apostle with us who
recites the Holy Qur'an in the early morning time. He gave us guidance and
light while we were blind and astray, so our hearts are sure that whatever he
says, will certainly happen. He does not touch his bed at night, being busy in
worshipping Allah while the pagans are sound asleep in their beds.' "

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 173:
Narrated Abu Salama bin 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf:
that he heard Hassan bin Thabit Al-Ansari asking the witness of Abu Huraira,
saying, "O Abu- Huraira! I beseech you by Allah (to tell me). Did you hear
Allah's Apostle saying' 'O Hassan ! Reply on behalf of Allah's Apostle. O Allah
! Support him (Hassan) with the Holy Spirit (Gabriel).'?" Abu Huraira said,
"Yes."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 174:
Narrated Al-Bara:
The Prophet said to Hassan, "Lampoon them (the pagans) in verse, and
Gabriel is with you."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 175:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "It is better for a man to fill the inside of his body with pus
than to fill it with poetry."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 176:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle; said, "It is better for anyone of you that the inside of his
body be filled with pus which may consume his body, than it be filled with
poetry."
Volume 8, Book 73, Number 177:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah, the brother of Abu Al-Qu'ais asked my permission to enter after the
verses of Al-Hijab (veiling the ladies) was revealed, and I said, "By Allah, I will
not admit him unless I take permission of Allah's Apostle for it was not the
brother of Al-Qu'ais who had suckled me, but it was the wife of Al-Qu'ais,
who had suckled me." Then Allah's Apostle entered upon me, and I said, "O
Allah's Apostle! The man has not nursed me but his wife has nursed me." He
said, "Admit him because he is your uncle (not from blood relation, but
because you have been nursed by his wife), Taribat Yaminuki." 'Urwa said,
"Because of this reason, ' Aisha used to say: Foster suckling relations render
all those things (marriages etc.) illegal which are illegal because of the
corresponding blood relations." (See Hadith No. 36, Vol. 7)

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 178:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet intended to return home after the performance of the Hajj, and
he saw Safiya standing at the entrance of her tent, depressed and sad
because she got her menses. The Prophet said, "Aqra Halqa! --An expression
used in the Quraish dialect--"You will detain us." The Prophet then asked
(her), "Did you perform the Tawaf Al-Ifada on the Day of Sacrifice (10th of
Dhul-Hijja)?" She said, "Yes." The Prophet said, "Then you can leave (with
us)."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 179:
Narrated Um Hani:
(the daughter of Abu Talib) I visited Allah's Apostle in the year of the
Conquest of Mecca and found him taking a bath, and his daughter, Fatima
was screening him. When I greeted him, he said, "Who is it?" I replied, "I am
Um Hani, the daughter of Abu Talib." He said, "Welcome, O Um Hani ! "
When the Prophet had finished his bath, he stood up and offered eight
Rakat of prayer while he was wrapped in a single garment. When he had
finished his prayer, I said, "O Allah's Apostle! My maternal brother assumes
(or claims) that he will murder some man whom I have given shelter, i.e., soand-so bin Hubaira." Allah's Apostle said, "O Um Hani! We shelter him whom
you have sheltered." Um Hani added, "That happened in the forenoon."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 180:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet saw a man driving a Badana (a camel for sacrifice) and said (to
him). "Ride it." The man said, "It is a Bandana." The Prophet said, "Ride on
it." The man said, "It is a Bandana." The Prophet said, Ride on it, woe to
you!"

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 181:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle saw a man driving a Badana (a camel for sacrifice) and said to
him, "Ride on it." The man said, "O Allah's Apostle! It is a Bandana." The
Prophet said, "Ride on it, woe to you!" on the second or third time.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 182:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle was on a journey and he had a black slave called Anjasha, and
he was driving the camels (very fast, and there were women riding on those
camels). Allah's Apostle said, "Waihaka (May Allah be merciful to you), O
Anjasha! Drive slowly (the camels) with the glass vessels (women)!"
Volume 8, Book 73, Number 183:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
A man praised another man in front of the Prophet. The Prophet said thrice,
"Wailaka (Woe on you) ! You have cut the neck of your brother!" The
Prophet added, "If it is indispensable for anyone of you to praise a person,
then he should say, "I think that such-and-such person (is so-and-so), and
Allah is the one who will take his accounts (as he knows his reality) and none
can sanctify anybody before Allah (and that only if he knows well about that
person.)".

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 184:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
While the Prophet was distributing (war booty etc.) one day, Dhul
Khawaisira, a man from the tribe of Bani Tamim, said, "O Allah's Apostle! Act
justly." The Prophets said, "Woe to you! Who else would act justly if I did not
act justly?" 'Umar said (to the Prophet ), "Allow me to chop his neck off."
The Prophet said, "No, for he has companions (who are apparently so pious
that) if anyone of (you compares his prayer with) their prayer, he will
consider his prayer inferior to theirs, and similarly his fasting inferior to
theirs, but they will desert Islam (go out of religion) as an arrow goes
through the victim's body (games etc.) in which case if its Nasl is examined
nothing will be seen thereon, and if its Nady is examined, nothing will be
seen thereon, and if its Qudhadh is examined, nothing will be seen thereon,
for the arrow has gone out too fast even for the excretions and blood to
smear over it. Such people will come out at the time of difference among
the (Muslim) people and the sign by which they will be recognized, will be a
man whose one of the two hands will look like the breast of a woman or a
lump of flesh moving loosely." Abu Said added, "I testify that I heard that
from the Prophet and also testify that I was with 'Ali when 'Ali fought
against those people. The man described by the Prophet was searched for
among the killed, and was found, and he was exactly as the Prophet had
described him." (See Hadith No. 807, Vol. 4)
Volume 8, Book 73, Number 185:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I am ruined!" The
Prophet said, "Waihaka (May Allah be merciful to you) !" The man said, "I
have done sexual intercourse with my wife while fasting in Ramadan." The
Prophet said, "Manumit a slave." The man said, " I cannot afford that. " The
Prophet said; "Then fast for two successive months." The man said, " I have
no power to do so." The Prophet said, "Then feed sixty poor persons." The
man said, "I have nothing (to feed sixty persons). Later a basket full of dates
were brought to the Prophet and he said (to the man), "Take it and give it in
charity." The man said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall I give it to people other than
my family? By Him in Whose Hand my life is, there is nobody poorer than me
in the whole city of Medina." The Prophet smiled till his premolar teeth
became visible, and said, "Take it." Az-Zuhri said (that the Prophet said).
"Wailaka."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 186:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
A bedouin said, "O Allah's Apostle! Inform me about the emigration." The
Prophet said, "Waihaka (May Allah be merciful to you)! The question of
emigration is a difficult one. Have you got some camels?" The bedouin said,
"Yes." The Prophet said, "Do you pay their Zakat?" He said, "Yes." The
Prophet said, "Go on doing like this from beyond the seas, for Allah will not
let your deeds go in vain."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 187:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "Wailakum" (woe to you) or "waihakum" (May Allah be
merciful to you)." Shu'ba is not sure as to which was the right word. "Do not
become disbelievers after me by cutting the necks of one another."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 188:
Narrated Anas:
A bedouin came to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! When will The
Hour be established?" The Prophet said, "Wailaka (Woe to you), What have
you prepared for it?" The bedouin said, "I have not prepared anything for it,
except that I love Allah and H is Apostle." The Prophet said, "You will be
with those whom you love." We (the companions of the Prophet ) said,
"And will we too be so? The Prophet said, "Yes." So we became very glad on
that day. In the meantime, a slave of Al-Mughira passed by, and he was of
the same age as I was. The Prophet said. "If this (slave) should live long, he
will not reach the geriatric old age, but the Hour will be established."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 189:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "Everyone will be with those whom he loves."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 190:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud:
A man came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! What do you say
about a man who loves some people but cannot catch up with their good
deeds?" Allah's Apostle said, "Everyone will be with those whom he loves."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 191:
Narrated Abu Musa
It was said to the Prophet; , "A man may love some people but he cannot
catch up with their good deeds?" The Prophet said, "Everyone will be with
those whom he loves."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 192:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
A man asked the Prophet "When will the Hour be established O Allah's
Apostle?" The Prophet . said, "What have you prepared for it?" The man said,
" I haven't prepared for it much of prayers or fast or alms, but I love Allah
and His Apostle." The Prophet said, "You will be with those whom you love."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 193:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle said to Ibn Saiyad "I have hidden something for you in my
mind; What is it?" He said, "Ad-Dukh." The Prophet said, "Ikhsa."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 194:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
'Umar bin Al-Khattab set out with Allah's Apostle, and a group of his
companions to Ibn Saiyad. They found him playing with the boys in the fort
or near the Hillocks of Bani Maghala. Ibn Saiyad was nearing his puberty at
that time, and he did not notice the arrival of the Prophet till Allah's Apostle
stroked him on the back with his hand and said, "Do you testify that I am
Allah's Apostle?" Ibn Saiyad looked at him and said, "I testify that you are
the Apostle of the unlettered ones (illiterates)". Then Ibn Saiyad said to the
Prophets . "Do you testify that I am Allah's Apostle?" The Prophet denied
that, saying, "I believe in Allah and all His Apostles," and then said to Ibn
Saiyad, "What do you see?" Ibn Saiyad said, "True people and liars visit me."
The Prophet said, "You have been confused as to this matter." Allah's
Apostle added, "I have kept something for you (in my mind)." Ibn Saiyad
said, "Ad-Dukh." The Prophet said, "Ikhsa (you should be ashamed) for you
can not cross your limits." 'Umar said, "O Allah's Apostle! Allow me to chop
off h is neck." Allah's Apostle said (to Umar). "Should this person be him (i.e.
Ad-Dajjal) then you cannot over-power him; and should he be someone else,
then it will be no use your killing him." 'Abdullah bin 'Umar added: Later on
Allah's Apostle and Ubai bin Ka'b Al-Ansari (once again) went to the garden
in which Ibn Saiyad was present.
When Allah's Apostle entered the garden, he started hiding behind the
trunks of the date-palms intending to hear something from Ibn Saiyad
before the latter could see him. Ibn Saiyad was Lying on his bed, covered
with a velvet sheet from where his mumur were heard. Ibn Saiyad's mother
saw the Prophet and said, "O Saf (the nickname of Ibn Saiyad)! Here is
Muhammad!" Ibn Saiyad stopped his murmuring. The Prophet said, "If his
mother had kept quiet, then I would have learnt more about him." 'Abdullah
added: Allah's Apostle stood up before the people (delivering a sermon),
and after praising and glorifying Allah as He deserved, he mentioned the AdDajjal saying, "I warn you against him, and there has been no prophet but
warned his followers against him. Noah warned his followers against him
but I am telling you about him, something which no prophet has told his
people of, and that is: Know that he is blind in one eye where as Allah is not
so."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 195:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
When the delegation of 'Abdul Qais came to the Prophet, he said,
"Welcome, O the delegation who have come! Neither you will have disgrace,
nor you will regret." They said, "O Allah's Apostle! We are a group from the
tribe of Ar-Rabi'a, and between you and us there is the tribe of Mudar and
we cannot come to you except in the sacred months. So please order us to
do something good (religious deeds) so that we may enter Paradise by
doing that, and also that we may order our people who are behind us
(whom we have left behind at home) to follow it." He said, "Four and four:"
offer prayers perfectly , pay the Zakat, (obligatory charity), fast the month
of Ramadan, and give one-fifth of the war booty (in Allah's cause), and do
not drink in (containers called) Ad-Duba,' Al-Hantam, An-Naqir and AlMuzaffat."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 196:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "For every betrayer (perfidious person), a flag will be
raised on the Day of Resurrection, and it will be announced (publicly) 'This is
the betrayal (perfidy) of so-and-so, the son of so-and-so.' "

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 197:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "A flag will be fixed on the Day of Resurrection for
every betrayer, and it will be announced (publicly in front of everybody),
'This is the betrayal (perfidy) so-and-so, the son of so-and-so."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 198:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "None of you should say Khabuthat Nafsi, but he is
recommended to say 'Laqisat Nafsi."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 199:
Narrated Sal:
The Prophet said, "None of you should say Khabuthat Nafsi but he is
recommended to say 'Laqisat Nafsi (See Hadith No. 202)
Volume 8, Book 73, Number 200:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah said, "The offspring of Adam abuse the Dahr
(Time), and I am the Dahr; in My Hands are the night and the day." !

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 201:
Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet said, "Don't call the grapes Al-Karm, and
don't say 'Khai

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 202:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "They say Al-Karm (the generous), and in fact Al-Karm is
the heart of a believer."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 203:
Narrated 'Ali:
I never heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Let my father and mother be sacrificed
for you," except for Sa'd (bin Abi Waqqas). I heard him saying, "Throw!
(arrows), Let my father and mother be sacrificed for you !" (The subnarrator added, "I think that was in the battle of Uhud.")

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 204:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
That he and Abu Talha were coming in the company of the Prophet towards
Medina), while Safiya (the Prophet's wife) was riding behind him on his she-
camel. After they had covered a portion of the way suddenly the foot of the
she-camel slipped and both the Prophet and the woman (i.e., his wife,
Safiya) fell down. Abu Talha jumped quickly off his camel and came to the
Prophet (saying.) "O Allah's Apostle! Let Allah sacrifice me for you! Have you
received any injury?" The Prophet said, "No, but take care of the woman (my
wife)." Abu Talha covered his face with his garment and went towards her
and threw his garment over her. Then the woman got up and Abu Talha
prepared their she camel (by tightening its saddle, etc.) and both of them
(the Prophet and Safiya) mounted it. Then all of them proceeded and when
they approached near Medina, or saw Medina, the Prophet said, "Ayibun,'
abidun, taibun, liRabbina hamidun (We are coming back (to Medina) with
repentance, worshipping (our Lord) and celebrating His (our Lord's)
praises". The Prophet continued repeating these words till he entered the
city of Medina.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 205:
Narrated Jabir:
A boy was born for a man among us, and the man named him Al-Qasim. We
said to him, "We will not call you Abu-l-Qasim, nor will we respect you for
that." The Prophet was informed about that, and he said, "Name your son
'Abdur-Rahman."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 206:
Narrated Jabi:
A man among us begot a boy whom he named Al-Qasim. The people said,
"We will not call him (i.e., the father) by that Kuniya (Abu-l-Qasim) till we ask
the Prophet about it. The Prophet said. "Name yourselves by my name, but
do not call (yourselves) by my Kuniya."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 207:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Abu-l-Qasim (The Prophet) said, "Name yourselves by my name, but do not
call yourselves by my Kuniya."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 208:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
A man among us begot a boy whom he named Al-Qasim. The people said (to
him), "We will not call you Abul-l-Qasim, nor will we please you by calling you
so." The man came to the Prophet and mentioned that to him. The Prophet
said to him, "Name your son 'Abdur-Rahman."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 209:
Narrated Al-Musaiyab:
That his father (Hazn bin Wahb) went to the Prophet and the Prophet asked
(him), "What is your name?" He replied, "My name is Hazn." The Prophet
said, "You are Sahl." Hazn said, "I will not change the name with which my
father has named me." Ibn Al-Musaiyab added: We have had roughness (in
character) ever since.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 210:
Narrated Al-Musaiyab:
on the authority of his father similarly as above (i.e., 209).

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 211:
Narrated Sahl:
When Al-Mundhir bin Abu Usaid was born, he was brought to the Prophet
who placed him on his thigh. While Abu Usaid was sitting there, the Prophet
was busy with something in his hands so Abu Usaid told someone to take his
son from the thigh of the Prophet . When the Prophet finished his job (with
which he was busy), he said, "Where is the boy?" Abu Usaid replied, "We
have sent him home." The Prophet said, "What is his name?" Abu Usaid said,
"(His name is) so-and-so. " The Prophet said, "No, his name is Al-Mundhir."
So he called him Al-Mundhir from that day.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 212:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Zainab's original name was "Barrah," but it was said' "By that she is giving
herself the prestige of piety." So the Prophet changed her name to Zainab.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 213:
Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab:
That when his grandfather, Hazn visited the Prophet the Prophet said (to
him), "What is your name?" He said, "My name is Hazn." The Prophet said, "
But you are Sahl." He said, "I will not change my name with which my father
named me." Ibn Al-Musaiyab added: So we have had roughness (in
character) ever since.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 214:
Narrated Isma'il:
I asked Abi Aufa, "Did you see Ibrahim, the son of the Prophet ?" He said,
"Yes, but he died in his early childhood. Had there been a Prophet after
Muhammad then his son would have lived, but there is no Prophet after
him."
Volume 8, Book 73, Number 215:
Narrated Al-Bara:
When Ibrahim (the son of the Prophet) died, Allah's Apostle said, "There is a
wet nurse for him in Paradise."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 216:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah Al-Ansari:
Allah's Apostle said, "Name yourselves after me (by my name) but do not
call (yourselves) by my Kuniya (1), for I am Al-Qasim (distributor), and I
distribute among you Allah's blessings." This narration has also come on the
authority of Anas that the ! Prophet said so."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 217:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Name yourselves after me (by my name), but do not call
yourselves by my Kuniya, and whoever sees me in a dream, he surely sees
me, for Satan cannot impersonate me (appear in my figure). And whoever
intentionally ascribes something to me falsely, he will surely take his place in
the (Hell) Fire.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 218:
Narrated Abu Musa:
I got a son and I took him to the Prophet who named him Ibrahim, and put
in his mouth the juice of a date fruit (which be himself had chewed?, and
invoked for Allah's blessing upon him, and then gave him back to me. He
was the eldest son of Abii Musa.
Volume 8, Book 73, Number 219:
Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shuba:
Solar eclipse occurred on the day of Ibrahim's death (the Prophet's son).

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 220:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife the Prophet) Allah's Apostle said, "O Aisha! This is Gabriel sending
his greetings to you." I said, "Peace, and Allah's Mercy be on him." 'Aisha
added: The Prophet used to see things which we used not to see.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 221:
Narrated Anas:
Once Um Sulaim was (with the women who were) in charge of the luggage
on a journey, and Anjashah, the slave of the Prophet, was driving their
camels (very fast). The Prophet said, "O Anjash! Drive slowly (the camels)
with the glass vessels (i.e., ladies)."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 222:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet was the best of all the people in character. I had a brother
called Abu 'Umar, who, I think, had been newly weaned. Whenever he (that
child) was brought to the Prophet the Prophet used to say, "O Abu 'Umar!
What did Al-Nughair (nightingale) (do)?" It was a nightingale with which he
used to play. Sometimes the time of the Prayer became due while he (the
Prophet) was in our house. He would order that the carpet underneath him
be swept and sprayed with water, and then he would stand up (for the
prayer) and we would line up behind him, and he would lead us in prayer.
Volume 8, Book 73, Number 223:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
The most beloved names to 'Ali was Abu Turab, and he used to be pleased
when we called him by it, for none named him Abu Turab (for the first time),
but the Prophet. Once 'Ali got angry with (his wife) Fatima, and went out (of
his house) and slept near a wall in the mosque. The Prophet came searching
for him, and someone said, "He is there, Lying near the wall." The Prophet
came to him while his ('Ali's) back was covered with dust. The Prophet
started removing the dust from his back, saying, "Get up, O Abu Turab!"

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 224:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The most awful name in Allah's sight on the Day of
Resurrection, will be (that of) a man calling himself Malik Al-Amlak (the king
of kings)."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 225:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The most awful (meanest) name in Allah's sight." Sufyan
said more than once, "The most awful (meanest) name in Allah's sight is
(that of) a man calling himself king of kings." Sufyan said, "Somebody else
(i.e. other than Abu Az-Zinad, a sub-narrator) says: What is meant by 'The
king of kings' is 'Shahan Shah.,"

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 226:
Narrated Usama bin Zaid:
That Allah's Apostle rode over a donkey covered with a Fadakiya (velvet
sheet) and Usama was riding behind him. He was visiting Sa'd bin 'Ubada
(who was sick) in the dwelling place of Bani Al-Harith bin Al-Khazraj and this
incident happened before the battle of Badr. They proceeded till they
passed by a gathering in which 'Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul was present.,
and that was before 'Abdullah bin Ubat embraced Islam. In that gathering
there were Muslims, pagan idolators and Jews, and among the Muslims
there was 'Abdullah bin Rawaha.
When a cloud of dust raised by (the movement of ) the animal covered that
gathering, 'Abdullah bin Ubai covered his nose with his garment and said,
"Do not cover us with dust." Allah's Apostle greeted them, stopped,
dismounted and invited them to Allah (i.e. to embrace Islam) and recited to
them the Holy Qur'an. On that 'Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul said to him, "O
man! There is nothing better than what you say, if it is the truth. So do not
trouble us with it in our gatherings, but if somebody comes to you, you can
preach to him." On that 'Abdullah bin Rawaha said "Yes, O Allah's Apostle!
Call on us in our gathering, for we love that." So the Muslims, the pagans
and the Jews started abusing one another till they were about to fight with
one another. Allah's Apostle kept on quietening them till all of them became
quiet, and then Allah's Apostle rode his animal and proceeded till he entered
upon Sa'd bin 'Ubada. Allah's Apostle said, "O Sa'd! Didn't you hear what
Abu Habab said?" (meaning 'Abdullah bin Unbar). "He said so-and-so." Sa'd
bin Ubada said, "O Allah's Apostle! Let my father be sacrificed for you !
Excuse and forgive him for, by Him Who revealed to you the Book, Allah
sent the Truth which was revealed to you at the time when the people of
this town had decided to crown him ('Abdullah bin Ubai) as their ruler.
So when Allah had prevented that with the Truth He had given you, he was
choked by that, and that caused him to behave in such an impolite manner
which you had noticed." So Allah's Apostle excused him. (It was the custom
of) Allah's Apostle and his companions to excuse the pagans and the people
of the scripture (Christians and Jews) as Allah ordered them, and they used
to be patient when annoyed (by them). Allah said: 'You shall certainly hear
much that will grieve you from those who received the Scripture before
you.....and from the pagans (3.186)
He also said: 'Many of the people of the scripture wish that if they could turn
you away as disbelievers after you have believed. .... (2.109) So Allah's
Apostle used to apply what Allah had ordered him by excusing them till he
was allowed to fight against them. When Allah's Apostle had fought the
battle of Badr and Allah killed whomever He killed among the chiefs of the
infidels and the nobles of Quraish, and Allah's Apostle and his companions
had returned with victory and booty, bringing with them some of the chiefs
of the infidels and the nobles of the Quraish as captives. 'Abdullah bin Ubai
bin Salul and the pagan idolators who were with him, said, "This matter
(Islam) has now brought out its face (triumphed), so give Allah's Apostle the
pledge of allegiance (for embracing Islam.)". Then they became Muslims.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 227:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Al-Harith bin Naufal:
Abbas bin 'Abdul Muttalib said, "O Allah's Apostle! Did you benefit Abu Talib
with anything as he used to protect and take care of you, and used to
become angry for you?" The Prophet said, "Yes, he is in a shallow place of
Fire. But for me he would have been in the lowest part of the Fire."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 228:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Once the Prophet was on one of his journeys, and the driver of the camels
started chanting (to let the camels go fast). The Prophet said to him. "(Take
care) Drive slowly with the glass vessels, O Anjasha! Waihaka (May Allah be
Merciful to you)."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 229:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet was on a journey and a slave named Anjasha was chanting
(singing) for the camels to let them go fast (while driving). The Prophet said,
"O Anjasha, drive slowly (the camels) with the glass vessels!" Abu Qilaba
said, "By the glass vessels' he meant the women (riding the camels)."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 230:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet had a Had (a camel driver) called Anjasha, and he had a nice
voice. The Prophet said to him, "(Drive) slowly, O Anjasha! Do not break the
glass vessels!" And Qatada said, "(By vessels') he meant the weak women."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 231:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
There was a state of fear in Medina. Allah's Apostle rode a horse belonging
to Abu Talha (in order to see the matter). The Prophet said, "We could not
see anything, and we found that horse like a sea (fast in speed)."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 232:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Some people asked Allah's Apostle about the fore-tellers. Allah's Apostle
said to them, "They are nothing (i.e., liars)." The people said, 'O Allah's
Apostle ! Sometimes they tell something which comes out to be true."
Allah's Apostle said, "That word which comes to be true is what a jinx
snatches away by stealing and then pours it in the ear of his fore-teller with
a sound similar to the cackle of a hen, and then they add to it one-hundred
lies."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 233:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
That he heard Allah's Apostle saying. "Then there was a pause in the
revelation of the Divine Inspiration to me. Then while I was walking all of a
sudden I heard a voice from the sky, and I raised my sight towards the sky
and saw the same angel who had visited me in the cave of Hira,' sitting on a
chair between the sky and the earth."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 234:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Once I stayed overnight at the house of Maimuna and the Prophet was
there with her. When it was the last third of the night, or some part of the
night, the Prophet got up looking towards the sky and recited: 'Verily! In the
creation of the heavens and the earth, and in the alternation of Night and
Day, there are indeed signs for men of u understanding.' (3.190)

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 235:
Narrated Abu Musa:
That he was in the company of the Prophet in one of the gardens of Medina
and in the hand of the Prophet there was a stick, and he was striking
(slowly) the water and the mud with it. A man came (at the gate of the
garden) and asked permission to enter. The Prophet said, "Open the gate
for him and give him the glad tidings of entering Paradise. "I went, and
behold! It was Abu Bakr. So I opened the gate for him and informed him of
the glad tidings of entering Paradise. Then another man came and asked
permission to enter. The Prophet said, "Open the gate for him and give him
the glad tidings of entering Paradise." Behold! It was 'Umar. So I opened the
gate for him and gave him the glad tidings of entering Paradise. Then
another man came and asked permission to enter.
The Prophet was sitting in a leaning posture, so he sat up and said, "Open
the gate for him and give him the glad tidings of entering Paradise with a
calamity which will befall him or which will take place." I went, and behold !
It was Uthman. So I opened the gate for him and gave him the glad tidings
of entering Paradise and also informed him of what the Prophet had said
(about a calamity). 'Uthman said, "Allah Alone Whose Help I seek (against
that calamity).

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 236:
Narrated 'Ali:
We were with the Prophet in a funeral procession, and he started scraping
the ground with a small stick and said, "There is none amongst you but has
been assigned a place (either) in Paradise and (or) in the Hell-Fire." The
people said (to him), "Should we not depend upon it?" He said: carry on
doing (good) deeds, for everybody will find easy such deeds as will lead him
to his destined place. He then recited: "As for him who gives (in charity) and
keeps his duty to Allah.." (92.5)

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 237:
Narrated Um Salama:
(One night) the Prophet woke up and said, "Subhan Allah ! How many
treasures have been (disclosed) sent down! And how many afflictions have
been descended! Who will go and wake the sleeping lady-occupants up of
these dwellings (for praying)?" (He meant by this his wives.) The Prophet
added, "A well-dressed soul (person) in this world may be naked in the
"Hereafter." 'Umar said, "I asked the Prophet, 'Have you divorced your
wives?' He said, 'No.' I said, 'Allahu Akbar.' "

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 238:
Narrated Safiya bint Huyai:
The wife of the Prophet that she went to Allah's Apostle while he was in
Itikaf (staying in the mosque) during the last ten nights of the month of
Ramadan. She spoke to him for an hour (a while) at night and then she got
up to return home. The Prophet got up to accompany her, and when they
reached the gate of the mosque opposite the dwelling place of Um Salama,
the wife of the Prophet, two Ansari men passed by, and greeting Allah's
Apostle , they quickly went ahead. Allah's Apostle said to them, "Do not be
in a hurry She is Safiya, the daughter of Huyai." They said, "Subhan Allah! O
Allah's Apostle (how dare we suspect you)." That was a great thing for both
of them. The Prophet then said, "Satan runs in the body of Adam's son (i.e.
man) as his blood circulates in it, and I was afraid that he (Satan) might
insert an evil thought in your hearts."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 239:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mughaffal Al-Muzani:
The Prophet forbade the throwing of stones (with the thumb and the index
or middle finger), and said "It neither hunts a game nor kills (or hurts) an
enemy, but it gouges out an eye or breaks a tooth."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 240:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Two men sneezed before the Prophet. The Prophet said to one of them,
"May Allah bestow His Mercy on you," but he did not say that to the other.
On being asked (why), the Prophet said, "That one praised Allah (at the time
of sneezing), while the other did not praise Allah."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 241:
Narrated Al-Bara:
The Prophet ordered us to do seven (things) and forbade us from seven
(other things): He ordered us to pay a visit to the sick, to follow funeral
possessions, to say: May Allah be merciful to you to a sneezer, - if he says:
Praise be to Allah, to accept invitation (invitation to a wedding banquet), to
return greetings, to help the oppressed, and to help others to fulfill their
oaths (provided it was not sinful). And he forbade us from seven (things): to
wear golden rings or golden bangles, to wear silk (cloth), Dibaj, Sundus and
Mayathir.

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 242:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah likes sneezing and dislikes yawning, so if someone
sneezes and then praises Allah, then it is obligatory on every Muslim who
heard him, to say: May Allah be merciful to you (Yar-hamuka-l-lah). But as
regards yawning, it is from Satan, so one must try one's best to stop it, if
one says 'Ha' when yawning, Satan will laugh at him."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 243:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, " If anyone of you sneezes, he should say 'Al-Hamdulillah'
(Praise be to Allah), and his (Muslim) brother or companion should say to
him, 'Yar-hamuka-l-lah' (May Allah bestow his Mercy on you). When the
latter says 'Yar-hamuka-llah", the former should say, 'Yahdikumul-lah wa
Yuslih balakum' (May Allah give you guidance and improve your condition)."

Volume 8, Book 73, Number 244:
Narrated Anas:
Two men sneezed before the Prophet and he said Tashmit to one of them,
while he did not say Tashmit to the other. So that man said, "O Allah's
Apostle! You said Tashmit to that fellow but you did not say Tashmit to me.
"The Prophet said, "That man praised Allah, but you did not praise Allah."
Volume 8, Book 73, Number 245:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah loves sneezing but dislikes yawning; so if anyone of
you sneezes and then praises Allah, every Muslim who hears him (praising
Allah) has to say Tashmit to him. But as regards yawning, it is from Satan, so
if one of you yawns, he should try his best to stop it, for when anyone of you
yawns, Satan laughs at him."
BOOK 74. ASKING PERMISSION (246-316)
Volume 8, Book 74, Number 246:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah created Adam in his complete shape and form
(directly), sixty cubits (about 30 meters) in height. When He created him, He
said (to him), "Go and greet that group of angels sitting there, and listen
what they will say in reply to you, for that will be your greeting and the
greeting of your offspring." Adam (went and) said, 'As-Salamu alaikum
(Peace be upon you).' They replied, 'AsSalamu-'Alaika wa Rahmatullah
(Peace and Allah's Mercy be on you) So they increased 'Wa Rahmatullah'
The Prophet added 'So whoever will enter Paradise, will be of the shape and
form of Adam. Since then the creation of Adam's (offspring) (i.e. stature of
human beings is being diminished continuously) to the present time."

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 247:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
Al-Fadl bin 'Abbas rode behind the Prophet as his companion rider on the
back portion of his she camel on the Day of Nahr (slaughtering of sacrifice,
10th Dhul-Hijja) and Al-Fadl was a handsome man. The Prophet stopped to
give the people verdicts. In the meantime, a beautiful woman From the tribe
of Khath'am came, asking the verdict of Allah's Apostle. Al-Fadl started
looking at her as her beauty attracted him. The Prophet looked behind while
Al-Fadl was looking at her; so the Prophet held out his hand backwards and
caught the chin of Al-Fadl and turned his face (to the owner sides in order
that he should not gaze at her. She said, "O Allah's Apostle! The obligation
of Performing Hajj enjoined by Allah on His worshipers, has become due
(compulsory) on my father who is an old man and who cannot sit firmly on
the riding animal. Will it be sufficient that I perform Hajj on his behalf?" He
said, "Yes."
Volume 8, Book 74, Number 248:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said, 'Beware! Avoid sitting on the roads." They (the people)
said, "O Allah s Apostle! We can't help sitting (on the roads) as these are
(our places) here we have talks." The Prophet said, ' l f you refuse but to sit,
then pay the road its right ' They said, "What is the right of the road, O
Allah's Apostle?" He said, 'Lowering your gaze, refraining from harming
others, returning greeting, and enjoining what is good, and forbidding what
is evil."

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 249:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
When we prayed with the Prophet we used to say: As-Salam be on Allah
from His worshipers, As-Salam be on Gabriel, As-Salam be on Michael, AsSalam be on so-and-so. When the Prophet finished his prayer, he faced us
and said, "Allah Himself is As-Salam (Peace), so when one sits in the prayer,
one should say, 'At-Tahiyatu-lillahi Was-Salawatu, Wat-Taiyibatu, As-Salamu
'Alaika aiyuhan-Nabiyyu wa Rah-matul-lahi wa Barakatuhu, As-Salamu 'Alaina
wa 'ala 'Ibadillahi assalihin, for if he says so, then it will be for all the pious
slave of Allah in the Heavens and the Earth. (Then he should say), 'Ash-hadu
an la ilaha illalllahu wa ash-hadu anna Muhammadan 'Abduhu wa rasulu-hu,'
and then he can choose whatever speech (i.e. invocation) he wishes " (See
Hadith No. 797, Vol. 1)

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 250:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The young should greet the old, the passer by should
greet the sitting one, and the small group of persons should greet the large
group of persons. "
Volume 8, Book 74, Number 251:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The riding one should greet the walking one, and the
walking one should greet the sitting one, and the small number of persons
should greet the large number of persons."

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 252:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The riding person should greet the walking one, and
the walking one should greet the sitting one, and the small number of
persons should greet the large number of persons."

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 252e:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The younger person should greet the older one, and
the walking person should greet the sitting one, and the small number of
persons should greet the large number of persons."

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 253g:
Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib:
Allah's Apostle ordered us to do seven (things): to visit the sick, to follow
the funeral processions, to say Tashmit to a sneezer, to help the weak, to
help the oppressed ones, to propagate As-Salam (greeting), and to help
others to fulfill their oaths (if it is not sinful). He forbade us to drink from
silver utensils, to wear gold rings, to ride on silken saddles, to wear silk
clothes, Dibaj (thick silk cloth), Qassiy and Istabraq (two kinds of silk). (See
Hadith No. 539, Vol. 7)
Volume 8, Book 74, Number 253k:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
A man asked the Prophet, "What Islamic traits are the best?" The Prophet
said, "Feed the people, and greet those whom you know and those whom
you do not know."

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 254:
Narrated Abu Aiyub:
The Prophet said, "It is not lawful for a Muslim to desert (not to speak to)
his brother Muslim for more than three days while meeting, one turns his
face to one side and the other turns his face to the other side. Lo! The better
of the two is the one who starts greeting the other."

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 255:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
that he was a boy of ten at the time when the Prophet emigrated to Medina.
He added: I served Allah's Apostle for ten years (the last part of his life time)
and I know more than the people about the occasion whereupon the order
of Al-Hijab was revealed (to the Prophet). Ubai b n Ka'b used to ask me
about it. It was revealed (for the first time) during the marriage of Allah's
Apostle with Zainab bint Jahsh. In the morning, the Prophet was a bridegroom of her and he Invited the people, who took their meals and went
away, but a group of them remained with Allah's Apostle and they
prolonged their stay. Allah's Apostle got up and went out, and I too, went
out along with him till he came to the lintel of 'Aisha's dwelling place. Allah's
Apostle thought that those people had left by then, so he returned, and I
too, returned with him till he entered upon Zainab and found that they were
still sitting there and had not yet gone. The Prophet went out again, and so
did I with him till he reached the lintel of 'Aisha's dwelling place, and then he
thought that those people must have left by then, so he returned, and so
did I with him, and found those people had gone. At that time the Divine
Verse of Al-Hijab was revealed, and the Prophet set a screen between me
and him (his family).

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 256:
Narrated Anas:
When the Prophet married Zainab, the people came and were offered a
meal, and then they sat down (after finishing their meals) and started
chatting. The Prophet showed as if he wanted to get up, but they did not
get up. When he noticed that, he got up, and some of the people also got up
and went away, while some others kept on sitting. When the Prophet
returned to enter, he found the people still sitting, but then they got up and
left. So I told the Prophet of their departure and he came and went in. I
intended to go in but the Prophet put a screen between me and him, for
Allah revealed:-- 'O you who believe! Enter not the Prophet's houses..'
(33.53)

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 257:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) 'Umar bin Al-Khattab used to say to Allah's Apostle
"Let your wives be veiled" But he did not do so. The wives of the Prophet
used to go out to answer the call of nature at night only at Al-Manasi.' Once
Sauda, the daughter of Zam'a went out and she was a tall woman. 'Umar bin
Al-Khattab saw her while he was in a gathering, and said, "I have recognized
you, O Sauda!" He ('Umar) said so as he was anxious for some Divine orders
regarding the veil (the veiling of women.) So Allah revealed the Verse of
veiling. (Al-Hijab; a complete body cover excluding the eyes). (See Hadith
No. 148, Vol. 1)

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 258:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:
A man peeped through a round hole into the dwelling place of the Prophet,
while the Prophet had a Midray (an iron comb) with which he was scratching
his head. the Prophet said, " Had known you were looking (through the
hole), I would have pierced your eye with it (i.e., the comb)." Verily! The
order of taking permission to enter has been enjoined because of that sight,
(that one should not look unlawfully at the state of others). (See Hadith No.
807, Vol. 7)

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 259:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
A man peeped into a room of the Prophet. The Prophet stood up, holding an
arrow head. It is as if I am just looking at him, trying to stab the man.

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 260:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
I have not seen a thing resembling 'lamam' (minor sins) than what Abu
Huraira 'narrated from the Prophet who said "Allah has written for Adam's
son his share of adultery which he commits inevitably. The adultery of the
eyes is the sight (to gaze at a forbidden thing), the adultery of the tongue is
the talk, and the inner self wishes and desires and the private parts testify all
this or deny it."

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 261:
Narrated Anas:
Whenever Allah's Apostle greeted somebody, he used to greet him three
times, and if he spoke a sentence, he used to repeat it thrice.
Volume 8, Book 74, Number 262:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
While I was present in one of the gatherings of the Ansar, Abu Musa came as
if he was scared, and said, "I asked permission to enter upon 'Umar three
times, but I was not given the permission, so I returned." (When 'Umar came
to know about it) he said to Abu Musa, "Why did you not enter?'. Abu Musa
replied, "I asked permission three times, and I was not given it, so I returned,
for Allah's Apostle said, "If anyone of you asks the permission to enter
thrice, and the permission is not given, then he should return.' " 'Umar said,
"By Allah! We will ask Abu Musa to bring witnesses for it." (Abu Musa went
to a gathering of the Ansar and said). "Did anyone of you hear this from the
Prophet ?" Ubai bin Ka'b said, "By Allah, none will go with you but the
youngest of the people (as a witness)." (Abu Said) was the youngest of
them, so I went with Abu Musa and informed 'Umar that the Prophet had
said so. (See Hadith No. 277, Vol. 3)

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 263:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I entered (the house) along with Allah's Apostle . There he found milk in a
basin. He said, "O Abu Hirr! Go and call the people of Suffa to me." I went to
them and invited them. They came and asked permission to enter, and when
it was given, they entered. (See Hadith No. 459 for details)

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 264:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
that he passed by a group of boys and greeted them and said, "The Prophet
used to do so."

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 265:
Narrated Abu Hazim:
Sahl said, "We used to feel happy on Fridays." I asked Sahl, "Why?" He said,
"There was an old woman of our acquaintance who used to send somebody
to Buda'a (Ibn Maslama said, "Buda'a was a garden of date-palms at
Medina). She used to pull out the silq (a kind of vegetable) from its roots
and put it in a cooking pot, adding some powdered barley over it (and cook
it). After finishing the Jumua (Friday) prayer we used to (pass by her and)
greet her, whereupon she would present us with that meal, so we used to
feel happy because of that. We used to have neither a midday nap, nor
meals, except after the Friday prayer." (See Hadith No. 60, Vol.2)

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 266:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said, "O 'Aisha! This is Gabriel sending his greetings to you." I
said, "Peace, and Allah's Mercy be on him (Gabriel). You see what we do not
see." (She was addressing Allah's Apostle).

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 267:
Narrated Jabir:
I came to the Prophet in order to consult him regarding my father's debt.
When I knocked on the door, he asked, "Who is that?" I replied, "I" He said,
"I, I?" He repeated it as if he disliked it.

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 268:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man entered the mosque while Allah's Apostle was sitting in one side of
the mosque. The man prayed, came, and greeted the Prophet. Allah's
Apostle said to him, "Wa 'Alaikas Salam (returned his greeting). Go back and
pray as you have not prayed (properly)." The man returned, repeated his
prayer, came back and greeted the Prophet. The Prophet said, "Wa alaika-sSalam (returned his greeting). Go back and pray again as you have not
prayed (properly)." The man said at the second or third time, "O Allah's
Apostle! Kindly teach me how to pray". The Prophet said, "When you stand
for prayer, perform ablution properly and then face the Qibla and say Takbir
(Allahu-Akbar), and then recite what you know from the Qur'an, and then
bow with calmness till you feel at ease then rise from bowing, till you stand
straight, and then prostrate calmly (and remain in prostration) till you feel at
ease, and then raise (your head) and sit with calmness till you feel at ease
and then prostrate with calmness (and remain in prostration) till you feel at
ease, and then raise (your head) and sit with calmness till you feel at ease in
the sitting position, and do likewise in whole of your prayer." And Abu
Usama added, "Till you stand straight." (See Hadith No. 759, Vol.1)

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 269:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said (in the above narration No. 268), "And then raise your
head till you feel at ease while sitting. "

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 270:
Narrated 'Aisha: that the Prophet said to her, "Gabriel sends Salam
(greetings) to you." She replied, "Wa 'alaihi-s-Salam Wa Rahmatu-l-lah."
(Peace and Allah's Mercy be on him).

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 271:
Narrated 'Urwa-bin Az-Zubair:
Usama bin Zaid said, "The Prophet rode over a donkey with a saddle
underneath which there was a thick soft Fadakiya velvet sheet. Usama bin
Zaid was his companion rider, and he was going to pay a visit to Sa'd bin
Ubada (who was sick) at the dwelling place of Bani Al-Harith bin Al-Khazraj,
and this incident happened before the battle of Badr. The Prophet passed by
a gathering in which there were Muslims and pagan idolators and Jews, and
among them there was 'Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul, and there was 'Abdullah
bin Rawaha too. When a cloud of dust raised by the animal covered that
gathering, 'Abdullah bin Ubai covered his nose with his Rida (sheet) and said
(to the Prophet), "Don't cover us with dust." The Prophet greeted them and
then stopped, dismounted and invited them to Allah (i.e., to embrace Islam)
and also recited to them the Holy Quran. 'Abdullah bin Ubai' bin Salul said,
"O man! There is nothing better than what you say, if what you say is the
truth. So do not trouble us in our gatherings. Go back to your mount (or
house,) and if anyone of us comes to you, tell (your tales) to him." On that
'Abdullah bin Rawaha said, "(O Allah's Apostle!) Come to us and bring
it(what you want to say) in our gatherings, for we love that." So the
Muslims, the pagans and the Jews started quarreling till they were about to
fight and clash with one another. The Prophet kept on quietening them (till
they all became quiet). He then rode his animal, and proceeded till he
entered upon Sa'd bin 'Ubada, he said, "O Sa'd, didn't you hear what Abu
Habbab said? (He meant 'Abdullah bin Ubai). He said so-and-so." Sa'd bin
'Ubada said, "O Allah's Apostle! Excuse and forgive him, for by Allah, Allah
has given you what He has given you. The people of this town decided to
crown him (as their chief) and make him their king. But when Allah
prevented that with the Truth which He had given you, it choked him, and
that was what made him behave in the way you saw him behaving." So the
Prophet excused him.

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 272:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Ka'b:
I heard Ka'b bin Malik narrating (when he did not join the battle of Tabuk):
Allah's Apostle forbade all the Muslims to speak to us. I would come to
Allah's Apostle and greet him, and I would wonder whether the Prophet did
move his lips to return to my greetings or not till fifty nights passed away.
The Prophet then announced (to the people) Allah's forgiveness for us
(acceptance of our repentance) at the time when he had offered the Fajr
(morning) prayer.

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 273:
Narrated 'Aisha:
A group of Jews came to Allah's Apostle and said, "As-samu 'Alaika " (Death
be on you), and I understood it and said to them, "Alaikum AsSamu wa-lla'na (Death and curse be on you)." Allah's Apostle said, "Be calm! O 'Aisha,
for Allah loves that one should be kind and lenient in all matters." I said. "O
Allah's Apostle! Haven't you heard what they have said?" Allah's Apostle
said, "I have (already) said (to them), 'Alaikum (upon you).' "

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 274:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "When the Jews greet you, they usually say, 'As-Samu
'alaikum (Death be on you),' so you should say (in reply to them),
'Wa'alaikum (And on you)."

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 275:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
the Prophet said, "If the people of the Scripture greet you, then you should
say (in reply), 'Wa'alaikum (And on you).' "

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 276:
Narrated 'Ali:
Allah's Apostle sent me, Az-Zubair bin Al-Awwam and Abu Marthad AlGhanawi, and all of us were horsemen, and he said, "Proceed till you reach
Rawdat Khakh, where there is a woman from the pagans carrying a letter
sent by Hatib bin Abi Balta'a to the pagans (of Mecca)." So we overtook her
while she was proceeding on her camel at the same place as Allah's Apostle
told us. We said (to her) "Where is the letter which is with you?" She said, "I
have no letter with me." So we made her camel kneel down and searched
her mount (baggage etc) but could not find anything. My two companions
said, "We do not see any letter." I said, "I know that Allah's Apostle did not
tell a lie. By Allah, if you (the lady) do not bring out the letter, I will strip you
of your clothes' When she noticed that I was serious, she put her hand into
the knot of her waist sheet, for she was tying a sheet round herself, and
brought out the letter. So we proceeded to Allah's Apostle with the letter.
The Prophet said (to Habib), "What made you o what you have done, O
Hatib?" Hatib replied, "I have done nothing except that I believe in Allah and
His Apostle, and I have not changed or altered (my religion). But I wanted to
do the favor to the people (pagans of Mecca) through which Allah might
protect my family and my property, as there is none among your
companions but has someone in Mecca through whom Allah protects his
property (against harm). The Prophet said, "Habib has told you the truth, so
do not say to him (anything) but good." 'Umar bin Al-Khattab said, "Verily he
has betrayed Allah, His Apostle, and the believers! Allow me to chop his neck
off!" The Prophet said, "O 'Umar! What do you know; perhaps Allah looked
upon the Badr warriors and said, 'Do whatever you like, for I have ordained
that you will be in Paradise.'" On that 'Umar wept and said, "Allah and His
Apostle know best."

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 277:
Narrated Abu Sufyan bin Harb:
that Heraclius had sent for him to come along with a group of the Quraish
who were trading in Sha'm, and they came to him. Then Abu Sufyan
mentioned the whole narration and said, "Heraclius asked for the letter of
Allah's Apostle . When the letter was read, its contents were as follows: 'In
the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. From Muhammad, Allah's
slave and His Apostle to Heraclius, the Chief of Byzantines: Peace be upon
him who follows the right path (guidance)! Amma ba'du (to proceed )...'
(See Hadith No 6, Vol 1 for details)

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 278:
Narrated Abu Said:
The people of (the tribe of) Quraiza agreed upon to accept the verdict of
Sa'd. The Prophet sent for him (Sa'd) and he came. The Prophet said (to
those people), "Get up for your chief or the best among you!" Sa'd sat
beside the Prophet and the Prophet said (to him), "These people have
agreed to accept your verdict." Sa'd said, "So I give my judgment that their
warriors should be killed and their women and children should be taken as
captives." The Prophet said, "You have judged according to the King's
(Allah's) judgment." (See Hadith No. 447, Vol. 5)

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 279:
Narrated Qatada:
I asked Anas, "Was it a custom of the companions of the Prophet to shake
hands with one another?" He said, "Yes."

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 280:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Hisham:
We were in the company of the Prophet and he was holding the hand of
'Umar bin Al-Khattab.

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 281:
Narrated Ibn Mas'ud:
Allah's Apostle taught me the Tashah-hud as he taught me a Sura from the
Quran, while my hand was between his hands. (Tashah-hud was) all the best
compliments and the prayers and the good things are for Allah. Peace and
Allah's Mercy and Blessings be on you, O Prophet! Peace be on us and on
the pious slaves of Allah, I testify that none has the right to be worshipped
but Allah, and I also testify that Muhammad is Allah's slave and His Apostle.
(We used to recite this in the prayer) during the lifetime of the Prophet , but
when he had died, we used to say, "Peace be on the Prophet."

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 282:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
'Ali bin Abu Talib came out of the house of the Prophet during his fatal
ailment. The people asked ('Ali), "O Abu Hasan! How is the health of Allah's
Apostle this morning?" 'Ali said, "This morning he is better, with the grace of
Allah." Al-'Abbas held Ali by the hand and said, "Don't you see him (about to
die)? By Allah, within three days you will be the slave of the stick (i.e., under
the command of another ruler). By Allah, I think that Allah's Apostle will die
from his present ailment, for I know the signs of death on the faces of the
offspring of 'Abdul Muttalib. So let us go to Allah's Apostle to ask him who
will take over the Caliphate. If the authority is given to us, we will know it,
and if it is given to somebody else we will request him to recommend us to
him. " 'Ali said, "By Allah! If we ask Allah's Apostle for the rulership and he
refuses, then the people will never give it to us. Besides, I will never ask
Allah's Apostle for it." (See Hadith No 728, Vol 5)

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 283:
Narrated Muadh:
While I was a companion rider with the Prophet he said, "O Mu'adh!" I
replied, "Labbaik wa Sa'daik." He repeated this call three times and then
said, "Do you know what Allah's Right on His slaves is?" I replied, "No." He
said, Allah's Right on His slaves is that they should worship Him (Alone) and
should not join partners in worship with Him." He said, "O Mu'adh!" I
replied, "Labbaik wa Sa'daik." He said, "Do you know what the right of
(Allah's) salves on Allah is, if they do that (worship Him Alone and join none
in His worship)? It is that He will not punish them."

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 284:
Narrated Mu'adh:
as above, No. 283.

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 285:
Narrated Abu Dhar:
While I was walking with the Prophet at the Hurra of Medina in the evening,
the mountain of Uhud appeared before us. The Prophet said, "O Abu Dhar! I
would not like to have gold equal to Uhud (mountain) for me, unless
nothing of it, not even a single Dinar remains of it with me, for more than
one day or three days, except that single Dinar which I will keep for repaying
debts. I will spend all of it (the whole amount) among Allah's slaves like this
and like this and like this." The Prophet pointed out with his hand to
illustrate it and then said, "O Abu Dhar!" I replied, "Labbaik wa Sa'daik, O
Allah's Apostle!" He said, "Those who have much wealth (in this world) will
be the least rewarded (in the Hereafter) except those who do like this and
like this (i.e., spend their money in charity)." Then he ordered me, "Remain
at your place and do not leave it, O Abu Dhar, till I come back." He went
away till he disappeared from me. Then I heard a voice and feared that
something might have happened to Allah's Apostle, and I intended to go (to
find out) but I remembered the statement of Allah's Apostle that I should
not leave, my place, so I kept on waiting (and after a while the Prophet
came), and I said to him, "O Allah's Apostle, I heard a voice and I was afraid
that something might have happened to you, but then I remembered your
statement and stayed (there). The Prophet said, "That was Gabriel who
came to me and informed me that whoever among my followers died
without joining others in worship with Allah, would enter Paradise." I said,
"O Allah's Apostle! Even if he had committed illegal sexual intercourse and
theft?" He said, "Even if he had committed illegal sexual intercourse and
theft '

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 286:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "A man should not make another man get up from his (the
latter's) seat (in a gathering) in order to sit there.

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 287:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet forbade that a man should be made to get up from his seat so
that another might sit on it, but one should make room and spread out. Ibn
'Umar disliked that a man should get up from his seat and then somebody
else sit at his place.

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 288:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
When Allah's Apostle married Zainab bint Jahsh, he invited the people who
took their meals and then remained sitting and talking. The Prophet
pretended to be ready to get up, but the people did not get up. When he
noticed that, he got up, and when he had got up, some of those people got
up along with him and there remained three (who kept on sitting). Then the
Prophet came back and found those people still sitting. Later on those
people got up and went away. So I went to the Prophet and informed him
that they had left.
The Prophet came, and entered (his house). I wanted to enter(along with
him) but he dropped a curtain between me and him. Allah then revealed: 'O
you who believe! Do not enter the Prophet's Houses until leave is given... (to
His statement)... Verily! That shall be an enormity, in Allah's sight.' (33.53)

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 289:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
I saw Allah's Apostle in the courtyard of the Ka'ba in the Ihtiba.' posture
putting his hand round his legs like this.

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 290:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
Allah's Apostle said, "Shall I inform you of the biggest of the great sins?"
They said, "Yes, O Allah's Apostle!" He said, "To join partners in worship with
Allah, and to be undutiful to one's parents. "

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 291:
Narrated Bishr:
as above (No. 290) adding: The Prophet was reclining (leaning) and then he
sat up saying, "And I warn you against giving a false statement." And he
kept on saying that warning so much so that we said, "Would that he had
stopped."

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 292:
Narrated 'Uqba bin Al-Harith:
Once the Prophet offered the 'Asr prayer and then he walked quickly and
entered his house.
Volume 8, Book 74, Number 293:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle used to offer his prayer (while standing) in the midst of the
bed, and I used to lie in front of him between him and the Qibla It I had any
necessity for getting up and I used to dislike to get up and face him (while
he was in prayer), but I would gradually slip away from the bed.

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 294:
Narrated Abdullah bin 'Amr:
The news of my fasting was mentioned to the Prophet . So he entered upon
me and I put for him a leather cushion stuffed with palm-fibres. The Prophet
sat on the floor and the cushion was between me and him. He said to me,
"Isn't it sufficient for you (that you fast) three days a month?" I said, "O
Allah's Apostle! (I can fast more than this)." He said, "You may fast) five days
a month." I said, "O Allah's Apostle! (I can fast more than this)." He said,
"(You may fast) seven days." I said, "O Allah's Apostle!" He said, "Nine." I
said, "O Allah's Apostle!" He said, "Eleven." I said, "O Allah's Apostle!" He
said, "No fasting is superior to the fasting of (the Prophet David) which was
one half of a year, and he used, to fast on alternate days. (See Hadith No.
300, Vol 3)

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 295:
Narrated Ibrahim:
'Alaqama went to Sham and came to the mosque and offered a two-Rak'at
prayer, and invoked Allah: "O Allah! Bless me with a (pious) good
companion." So he sat beside Abu Ad-Darda' who asked, "From where are
you?" He said, "From the people of Kufa." Abu Darda' said, "Wasn't there
among you the person who keeps the secrets (of the Prophet ) which
nobody knew except him (i.e., Hudhaifa (bin Al-Yaman)). And isn't there
among you the person whom Allah gave refuge from Satan through the
request (tongue) of Allah's Apostle? (i.e., 'Ammar). Isn't there among you
the one who used to carry the Siwak and the cushion (or pillows (of the
Prophets)? (i.e., Ibn Mas'ud). How did Ibn Mas'ud use to recite 'By the night
as it conceals (the light)?" (Sura 92). 'Alqama said, "Wadhdhakari Wal Untha'
(And by male and female.") Abu Ad-Darda added. 'These people continued
to argue with me regarding it till they were about to cause me to have
doubts although I heard it from Allah's Apostle "

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 296:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
We used to have a midday nap and take our meals after the Jumua (prayer).

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 297:
Narrated Sahl bin Sad:
There was no name dearer to 'Ali than his nickname Abu Turab (the father of
dust). He used to feel happy whenever he was called by this name. Once
Allah's Apostle came to the house of Fatima but did not find 'Ali in the
house. So he asked "Where is your cousin?" She replied, "There was
something (a quarrel) between me and him whereupon he got angry with
me and went out without having a midday nap in my house." Allah's Apostle
asked a person to look for him. That person came, and said, "O Allah's
Apostle! He (Ali) is sleeping in the mosque." So Allah's Apostle went there
and found him lying. His upper body cover had fallen off to one side of his
body, and so he was covered with dust. Allah's Apostle started cleaning the
dust from him, saying, "Get up, O Abu Turab! Get up, Abu Turab!" (See
Hadith No. 432, Vol 1)

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 298:
Narrated Thumama:
Anas said, "Um Sulaim used to spread a leather sheet for the Prophet and he
used to take a midday nap on that leather sheet at her home." Anas added,
"When the Prophet had slept, she would take some of his sweat and hair
and collect it (the sweat) in a bottle and then mix it with Suk (a kind of
perfume) while he was still sleeping. "When the death of Anas bin Malik
approached, he advised that some of that Suk be mixed with his Hanut
(perfume for embalming the dead body), and it was mixed with his Hanut.

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 299:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Whenever Allah's Apostle went to Quba, he used to visit Um Haram bint
Milhan who would offer him meals; and she was the wife of 'Ubada bin Assamit. One day he went to her house and she offered him a meal, and after
that he slept, and then woke up smiling. She (Um Haram) said, "I asked him,
'What makes you laugh, O Allah's Apostle?' He said, 'Some people of my
followers were displayed before me as warriors fighting for Allah's Cause
and sailing over this sea, kings on thrones,' or said, 'like kings on thrones.'
(The narrator, Ishaq is in doubt about it.) I (Um Haram) said, 'O Allah's
Apostle! Invoke Allah that He may make me one of them.' He invoked (Allah)
for her and then lay his head and slept again and then woke up smiling. I
asked, 'What makes you laugh, O Allah's Apostle?' He said, 'Some people of
my followers were displayed before me as warriors fighting for Allah's Cause
and sailing over this sea, kings on the thrones,' or said, 'like kings on the
thrones.' I (Um Haram) said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah that He may
make me one of them.' He said, You will be amongst the first ones." It is said
that Um Haram sailed over the sea at the time of Muawiya, and on coming
out of the sea, she fell down from her riding animal and died.

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 300:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
The Prophet forbade two kinds of dresses and two kinds of bargains;
Ishtimal As-Samma and Al-Ihtiba in one garment with no part of it covering
one's private parts. (The two kinds of bargains were:) Al-Mulamasa and AlMunabadha.

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 301:
Narrated 'Aisha:
He added, 'But this year he reviewed it with me twice, and therefore I think
that my time of death has approached. So, be afraid of Allah, and be patient,
for I am the best predecessor for you (in the Hereafter).' " Fatima added,
"So I wept as you ('Aisha) witnessed. And when the Prophet saw me in this
sorrowful state, he confided the second secret to me saying, 'O Fatima! Will
you not be pleased that you will be chief of all the believing women (or chief
of the women of this nation i.e. my followers?")

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 302:
Narrated the uncle of 'Abbas bin Tamim:
I saw Allah's Apostle lying on his back in the mosque and putting one of his
legs over the other.

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 303:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
the Prophet said "When three persons are together, then no two of them
should hold secret counsel excluding the third person."

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 304:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet confided to me a secret which I did not disclose to anybody
after him. And Um Sulaim asked me (about that secret) but I did not tell her.

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 305:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "When you are three persons sitting together, then no
two of you should hold secret counsel excluding the third person until you
are with some other people too, for that would grieve him."

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 306:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
One day the Prophet divided and distributed something amongst the people
whereupon an Ansari man said, "In this division Allah's Countenance has not
been sought." I said, "By Allah! I will go (and inform) the Prophet." So I went
to him while he was with a group of people, and I secretly informed him of
that, whereupon he became so angry that his face became red, and he then
said, "May Allah bestow His Mercy on Moses (for) he was hurt more than
that, yet he remained patient."

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 307:
Narrated Anas:
The Iqama for the prayer was announced while a man was talking to Allah's
Apostle privately. He continued talking in that way till the Prophet's
companions slept, and afterwards the Prophet got up and offered the
prayer with them.

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 308:
Narrated Salim's father
The Prophet said, "Do not keep the fire burning in your houses when you go
to bed."

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 309:
Narrated Abu Musa:
One night a house in Medina was burnt with its occupants. The Prophet
spoke about them, saying, "This fire is indeed your enemy, so whenever you
go to bed, put it out to protect yourselves."

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 310:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "(At bedtime) cover the utensils, close the doors, and
put out the lights, lest the evil creature (the rat) should pull away the wick
and thus burn the people of the house."

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 311:
Narrated Jabir:
Allah s Apostle said, "When you intend going to bed at night, put out the
lights, close the doors, tie the mouths of the water skins, and cover your
food and drinks." Hamrnam said, "I think he (the other narrator) added,
'even with piece of wood across the utensil.'

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 312:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said "Five things are in accordance with Al Fitra (i.e. the
tradition of prophets): to be circumcised, to shave the pelvic region, to pull
out the hair of the armpits, to cut short the moustaches, and to clip the
nails.'

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 313:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said "The Prophet) Abraham circumcised himself after he
had passed the age of eighty years and he circumcised himself with an
adze."
Narrated Said bin Jubair: Ibn 'Abbas was asked, "How old were you when
the Prophet died?" He replied. "At that time I had been circumcised." At that
time, people did not circumcise the boys till they attained the age of
puberty. Sa'id bin Jubair said, "Ibn 'Abbas said, 'When the Prophet died, I
had already been circumcised. "

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 314:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever among you takes an oath wherein he says,
'By Al-Lat and Al-'Uzza,' names of two Idols worshipped by the Pagans, he
should say, 'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah; And whoever
says to his friend, 'Come, let me gamble with you ! He should give something
in charity. " (See Hadith No. 645)

Volume 8, Book 74, Number 315:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
During the life-time of the Prophet I built a house with my own hands so
that it might protect me from the rain and shade me from the sun; and none
of Allah's creatures assisted me in building it.
Volume 8, Book 74, Number 316:
Narrated, 'Amr:
Ibn 'Umar said, "By Allah, I have not put a brick over a brick (i.e. constructed
a building) or planted any date-palm tree since the death of the Prophet."
Sufyan (the sub narrator) said, "I told this narration (of Ibn 'Umar) to one of
his (Ibn 'Umar's) relatives, and he said, 'By Allah, he did build (something.'
"Sufyan added, "I said, 'He must have said (the above narration) before he
built."
BOOK 75. INVOCATIONS (317-420)
Volume 8, Book 75, Number 317e:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "For every prophet there is one (special invocation
(that will not be rejected) with which he appeals (to Allah), and I want to
keep such an invocation for interceding for my followers in the Hereafter."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 317o:
Narrated Anas:
that the Prophet said, "For every prophet there is an invocation that surely
will be responded by Allah," (or said), "For every prophet there was an
invocation with which he appealed to Allah, and his invocation was accepted
(in his lifetime), but I kept my (this special) invocation to intercede for my
followers on the Day of Resurrection."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 318:
Narrated Shaddad bin Aus:
The Prophet said "The most superior way of asking for forgiveness from
Allah is: 'Allahumma anta Rabbi la ilaha illa anta, Anta Khalaqtani wa ana
abduka, wa ana 'ala ahdika wa wa'dika mastata'tu, A'udhu bika min Sharri
ma sana'tu, abu'u Laka bini'matika 'alaiya, wa Abu Laka bidhanbi faghfirli
innahu la yaghfiru adhdhunuba illa anta." The Prophet added. "If somebody
recites it during the day with firm faith in it, and dies on the same day before
the evening, he will be from the people of Paradise; and if somebody recites
it at night with firm faith in it, and dies before the morning, he will be from
the people of Paradise."
Volume 8, Book 75, Number 319:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying." By Allah! I ask for forgiveness from Allah and
turn to Him in repentance more than seventy times a day."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 320:
Narrated Al-Harith bin Suwaid:
'Abdullah bin Mas'ud related to us two narrations: One from the Prophet
and the other from himself, saying: A believer sees his sins as if he were
sitting under a mountain which, he is afraid, may fall on him; whereas the
wicked person considers his sins as flies passing over his nose and he just
drives them away like this." Abu Shihab (the sub-narrator) moved his hand
over his nose in illustration. (Ibn Mas'ud added): Allah's Apostle said, "Allah
is more pleased with the repentance of His slave than a man who encamps
at a place where his life is jeopardized, but he has his riding beast carrying
his food and water. He then rests his head and sleeps for a short while and
wakes to find his riding beast gone. (He starts looking for it) and suffers
from severe heat and thirst or what Allah wished (him to suffer from). He
then says, 'I will go back to my place.' He returns and sleeps again, and then
(getting up), he raises his head to find his riding beast standing beside him."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 321:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah is more pleased with the repentance of His slave
than anyone of you is pleased with finding his camel which he had lost in the
desert. "

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 322:
Narrated Aisha:
The Prophet used to pray eleven Rakat in the late part of the night, and
when dawn appeared, he would offer two Rakat and then lie on his right
side till the Muadhdhin came to inform him (that the morning prayer was
due).

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 323:
Narrated Al-Bara bin 'Azib:
Allah's Apostle said to me, "When you want to go to bed, perform ablution
as you do for prayer, then lie down on your right side and say: 'Allahumma
aslamtu wajhi ilaika, wa fauwadtu Amri ilaika wa aljatu zahri ilaika, raghbatan
wa rahbatan ilaika, lamalja'a wa la manja mink a ill a ilaika. Amantu bikitabi
kalladhi anzalta wa bi nabiyyikal-ladhi arsalta'. If you should die then (after
reciting this) you will die on the religion of Islam (i.e., as a Muslim); so let
these words be the last you say (before going to bed)" While I was
memorizing it, I said, "Wa birasiulikal-ladhi arsalta (in Your Apostle whom
You have sent).' The Prophet said, "No, but say: Wa binabiyyi-kalladhi arsalta
(in Your Prophet whom You have sent)."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 324:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
When the Prophet went to bed, he would say: "Bismika amutu wa ahya."
and when he got up he would say:" Al-hamdu lillahil-ladhi ahyana ba'da ma
amatana wa ilaihin-nushur."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 325:
Narrated Al-Bara bin 'Azib:
e then (after reciting this before going to bed) you will die on the r
Volume 8, Book 75, Number 326:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
When the Prophet went to bed at night, he would put his hand under his
cheek and then say, "Allahumma bismika amutu wa ahya," and when he got
up, he would say, "Al-Hamdu lil-lahi al-ladhi ahyana ba'da ma amatana, wa
ilaihi an-nushur."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 327:
Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib:
When Allah's Apostle went to bed, he used to sleep on his right side and
then say, "All-ahumma aslamtu nafsi ilaika, wa wajjahtu wajhi ilaika, wa
fauwadtu Amri ilaika, wa alja'tu zahri ilaika, raghbatan wa rahbatan ilaika. La
Malja'a wa la manja minka illa ilaika. Amantu bikitabika al-ladhi anzalta wa
nabiyyika al-ladhi arsalta! Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever recites these words
(before going to bed) and dies the same night, he will die on the Islamic
religion (as a Muslim)."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 328:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
One night I slept at the house of Maimuna. The Prophet woke up, answered
the call of nature, washed his face and hands, and then slept. He got up (late
at night), went to a water skin, opened the mouth thereof and performed
ablution not using much water, yet he washed all the parts properly and
then offered the prayer. I got up and straightened my back in order that the
Prophet might not feel that I was watching him, and then I performed the
ablution, and when he got up to offer the prayer, stood on his left. He
caught hold of my ear and brought me over to his right side. He offered
thirteen Rak'at in all and then lay down and slept till he started blowing out
his breath as he used to do when he slept. In the meantime Bilal informed
the Prophet of the approaching time for the (Fajr) prayer, and the Prophet
offered the Fajr (Morning) prayer without performing new ablution. He used
to say in his invocation, Allaihumma ij'al fi qalbi nuran wa fi basari nuran, wa
fi sam'i nuran, wa'an yamini nuran, wa'an yasari nuran, wa fawqi nuran, wa
tahti nuran, wa amami nuran, wa khalfi nuran, waj'al li nuran." Kuraib (a sub
narrator) said, "I have forgotten seven other words, (which the Prophet
mentioned in this invocation). I met a man from the offspring of Al-'Abbas
and he narrated those seven things to me, mentioning, '(Let there be light
in) my nerves, my flesh, my blood, my hair and my body,' and he also
mentioned two other things."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 329:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
When the Prophet got up at night to offer the night prayer, he used to say:
"Allahumma laka-l-hamdu; Anta nuras-samawati wal ardi wa man fihinna. Wa
laka-l-hamdu; Anta qaiyim as-samawati wal ardi wa man fihinna. Wa laka-lhamdu; Anta-l-,haqqun, wa wa'daka haqqun, wa qauluka haqqun, wa liqauka
haqqun, wal-jannatu haqqun, wannaru haqqun, was-sa atu haqqun, wannabiyyuna huqqun, Mahammadun haqqun, Allahumma laka aslamtu, wa
Alaika tawakkaltu, wa bika amantu, wa ilaika anabtu, wa bika Khasamtu, wa
ilaika hakamtu, faghfirli ma qaddamtu wa ma akh-khartu, wa ma asrartu, wa
ma a'lantu. Anta al-muqaddimu, wa anta al-mu-'akhkhiru. La ilaha il-la anta
(or La ilaha ghairuka)"

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 330:
Narrated 'Ali:
Fatima complained about the blisters on her hand because of using a millstone. She went to ask the Prophet for servant, but she did not find him (at
home) and had to inform 'Aisha of her need. When he came, 'Aisha informed
him about it. Ali added: The Prophet came to us when we had gone to our
beds. When I was going to get up, he said, "'Stay in your places," and sat
between us, till I felt the coolness of the feet on my chest. The Prophet then
said, "Shall I not tell you of a thing which is better for you than a servant?
When you (both) go to your beds, say 'Allahu Akbar' thirty-four times, and
'Subhan Allah' thirty-three times, 'Alhamdu 'illah' thirty-three times, for that
is better for you than a servant." Ibn Sirin said, "Subhan Allah' (is to be said
for) thirty-four times."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 331:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Whenever Allah's Apostle went to bed, he used to blow on his hands while
reciting the Mu'auwidhat ( i.e. Suratal-Falaq and Surat-an-Nas, 113 and 114)
and then pass his hands over his body,

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 332:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "When anyone of you go to bed, he should shake out his
bed with the inside of his waist sheet, for he does not know what has come
on to it after him, and then he should say: 'Bismika Rabbi wada'tu Janbi wa
bika arfa'uhu, In amsakta nafsi farhamha wa in arsaltaha fahfazha bima
tahfazu bihi ibadakas-salihin."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 333:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "When it is the last third of the night, our Lord, the
Blessed, the Superior, descends every night to the heaven of the world and
says, 'Is there anyone who invokes Me (demand anything from Me), that I
may respond to his invocation; Is there anyone who asks Me for something
that I may give (it to) him; Is there anyone who asks My forgiveness that I
may forgive him?' "
Volume 8, Book 75, Number 334:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Whenever the Prophet went to the lavatory, he used to say: "Allahumma
Inni a'udhu bika mina-lkhubthi Wal khaba'ith."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 335:
Narrated Shaddad bin 'Aus:
The Prophet said, "The most superior way of asking for forgiveness from
Allah is: 'Allahumma anta Rabbi la ilaha illa anta. Khalaqtani wa ana 'abduka,
wa ana 'ala 'ahdika wa Wa'dika mastata'tu abu'u Laka bi ni 'matika wa abu'u
Laka bidhanbi; faghfirli fa'innahu la yaghfiru-dh-dhunuba ill a ant a. A'uidhu
bika min sharri ma sana'tu.' If somebody recites this invocation during the
night, and if he should die then, he will go to Paradise (or he will be from the
people of Paradise). And if he recites it in the morning, and if he should die
on the same day, he will have the same fate."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 336:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
Whenever the Prophet intended to go to bed, he would recite: "Bismika
Allahumma amutu wa ahya (With Your name, O Allah, I die and I live)." And
when he woke up from his sleep, he would say: "Al-hamdu lil-lahil-ladhi
ahyana ba'da ma amatana; wa ilaihi an-nushur (All the Praises are for Allah
Who has made us alive after He made us die (sleep) and unto Him is the
Resurrection). "

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 337:
Narrated Abu Dhar:
Whenever the Prophet lay on his bed, he used to say: "Allahumma bismika
amutu wa ahya," and when he woke up he would say: "Al-hamdu lil-lahilladhi
ahyana ba'da ma an atana, wa ilaihi an-nushur."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 338:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
Abu Bakr As-Siddiq said to the Prophet, "Teach me an invocation with which
I may invoke (Allah) in my prayer." The Prophet said, "Say: Allahumma inni
zalamtu nafsi zulman kathiran wala yaghfirudh-dhunuba illa anta, Faghfirli
maghfiratan min indika war-hamni, innaka antalGhafur-Rahim."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 339:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Verse: 'Neither say your prayer aloud, nor say it in a low tone.' (17.110)
was revealed as regards invocation.

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 340:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
We used to say in the prayer: 'AsSalam be on Allah, As-Salam be on so-and
so.' So one day the Prophet said to us, "Allah Himself is As-Salam; when
anyone of you sits during his prayer, he should say: 'At-tah, iyyatu-lillahi,' up
to 'As-Salihin,' (All the compliments are for Allah ...righteous people) for
when he recites this, then he says his Salam to all the righteous people
present in the heavens and on the earth. Then he should say, 'I testify that
none has the right to be worshipped except Allah, and that Muhammad is
His slave and His Apostle,' and then he can select whatever he likes to
celebrate (Allah's) Praises."
Volume 8, Book 75, Number 341:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The people said, "O Allah's Apostle! The rich people have got the highest
degrees of prestige and the permanent pleasures (in this life and the life to
come in the Hereafter)." He said, "How is that?" They said, "The rich pray as
we pray, and strive in Allah's Cause as we do, and spend from their surplus
wealth in charity, while we have no wealth (to spend likewise)." He said,
"Shall I not tell you a thing, by doing which, you will catch up with those who
are ahead of you and supersede those who will come after you; and nobody
will be able to do such a good deed as you do except the one who does the
same (deed as you do). That deed is to recite 'Subhan Allah ten times, and
'Al-Hamdulillah ten times, and 'AllahuAkbar' ten times after every prayer."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 342:
Narrated Warrad:
(the freed slave of Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba) Al-Mughira wrote to Muawiya bin
Abu Sufyan that Allah's Apostle used to say at the end of every prayer after
the Taslim, "La ilaha illa-l-lahu wahdahu la sharika lahu; lahu-l-mulk wa lahu-lhamd, wahuwa 'ala kulli shai'n qadir. Allahumma la mani'a Lima a taita, wa la
mu'ta Lima mana'ta, wa la yanfa'u dhal-jaddu minkal-jadd.

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 343:
Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa':
We went out with the Prophet to Khaibar. A man among the people said, "O
'Amir! Will you please recite to us some of your poetic verses?" So 'Amir got
down and started chanting among them, saying, "By Allah! Had it not been
for Allah, we would not have been guided." 'Amir also said other poetic
verses which I do not remember. Allah's Apostle said, "Who is this (camel)
driver?" The people said, "He is 'Amir bin Al-Akwa'," He said, "May Allah
bestow His Mercy on him." A man from the People said, "O Allah's Apostle!
Would that you let us enjoy his company longer." When the people
(Muslims) lined up, the battle started, and 'Amir was struck with his own
sword (by chance) by himself and died. In the evening, the people made a
large number of fires (for cooking meals). Allah's Apostle said, "What is this
fire? What are you making the fire for?" They said, "For cooking the meat of
donkeys." He said, "Throw away what is in the pots and break the pots!" A
man said, "O Allah's Prophet! May we throw away what is in them and wash
them?" He said, "Never mind, you may do so." (See Hadith No. 509, Vol. 5).

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 344:
Narrated Ibn Abi Aufa:
Whenever a man brought his alms to the Prophet, the Prophet would say,
"O Allah! Bestow Your Blessing upon the family of so-and-so." When my
father came to him (with his alms), he said, "O Allah! Bestow Your Blessings
upon the family of Abi Aufa."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 345:
Narrated Jarir:
Allah's Apostle said to me. "Will you relieve me from Dhi-al-Khalasa? " Dhi-alKhalasa was an idol which the people used to worship and it was called AlKa'ba al Yamaniyya. I said, "O Allah's Apostle I am a man who can't sit firm
on horses." So he stroked my chest (with his hand) and said, "O Allah! Make
him firm and make him a guiding and well-guided man." So I went out with
fifty (men) from my tribe of Ahrnas. (The sub-narrator, Sufyan, quoting Jarir,
perhaps said, "I went out with a group of men from my nation.") and came
to Dhi-al-Khalasa and burnt it, and then came to the Prophet and said, "O
Allah's Apostle! I have not come to you till I left it like a camel with a skin
disease." The Prophet then invoked good upon Ahmas and their cavalry
(fighters).
Volume 8, Book 75, Number 346:
Narrated Anas:
Um Sulaim said to the Prophet "Anas is your servant." The Prophet said, "O
Allah! increase his wealth and offspring, and bless (for him) what ever you
give him."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 347:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet heard a man reciting (the Qur'an) in the mosque. He said," May
Allah bestow His Mercy on him, as he made me remember such and-such
Verse which I had missed in such-and-such Sura."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 348:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet divided something (among the Muslims) and distributed the
shares (of the booty). A man said, "This division has not been made to
please Allah." When I informed the Prophet about it, he became so furious
that I noticed the signs of anger on his face and he then said, "May Allah
bestow His Mercy on Moses, for he was hurt with more than this, yet he
remained patient."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 349:
Narrated 'Ikrima:
Ibn 'Abbas said, "Preach to the people once a week, and if you won't, then
preach them twice, but if you want to preach more, then let it be three
times (a week only), and do not make the people fed-up with this Qur'an. If
you come to some people who are engaged in a talk, don't start interrupting
their talk by preaching, lest you should cause them to be bored. You should
rather keep quiet, and if they ask you, then preach to them at the time when
they are eager to hear what you say. And avoid the use of rhymed prose in
invocation for I noticed that Allah's Apostle and his companions always
avoided it."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 350:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle said, "When anyone of you appeal to Allah for something, he
should ask with determination and should not say, 'O Allah, if You wish, give
me.', for nobody can force Allah to do something against His Will.

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 351:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "None of you should say: 'O Allah, forgive me if You
wish; O Allah, be merciful to me if You wish,' but he should always appeal to
Allah with determination, for nobody can force Allah to do something
against His Will."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 352:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The invocation of anyone of you is granted (by Allah) if
he does not show impatience (by saying, "I invoked Allah but my request
has not been granted.")

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 353:
Narrated Anas:
While the Prophet was delivering a sermon on a Friday, a man stood up and
said, "O Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah to bless us with rain." (The Prophet
invoked Allah for rain.) So, the sky became overcast and it started raining till
one could hardly reach one's home. It kept on raining till the next Friday
when the same man or another man got up and said (to the Prophet),
"Invoke Allah to withhold the rain from us, for we have been drowned (with
heavy rain )." The Prophet said, "O Allah! Let it rain around us and not on
us." Then the clouds started dispersing around Medina and rain ceased to
fall on the people of Medina.

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 354:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid:
Allah's Apostle went out to this Musalla (praying place) to offer the prayer
of Istisqa.' He invoked Allah for rain and then faced the Qibla and turned his
Rida' (upper garment) inside out.

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 355:
Narrated Anas:
My mother said, "O Allah's Apostle! Please invoke Allah on behalf of your
servant." He said, "O Allah! Increase his wealth and children, and bestow
Your Blessing on whatever You give him." a time of distress.

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 356:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet used to invoke Allah at the time of distress, saying, "La ilaha
illal-lahu al-'Azim, al-Halim, La ilaha illal-lahu Rabbu-s-samawati wal-ard wa
Rabbu-l-arsh il-azim,"
Volume 8, Book 75, Number 357:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle used to say at a time of distress, "La ilaha illal-lahu Rabbul-l'arsh il-'azim, La ilaha illallahu Rabbu-s-samawati wa Rabbu-l-ard, Rabbu-l'arsh-il-Karim."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 358:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle used to seek refuge with Allah from the difficult moment of a
calamity and from being overtaken by destruction and from being destined
to an evil end, and from the malicious joy of enemies. Sufyan said, "This
narration contained three items only, but I added one. I do not know which
one that was."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 359:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When Allah's Apostle was healthy, he used to say, "No prophet dies till he is
shown his place in Paradise, and then he is given the option (to live or die)."
So when death approached him(during his illness), and while his head was
on my thigh, he became unconscious for a while, and when he recovered, he
fixed his eyes on the ceiling and said, "O Allah! (Let me join) the Highest
Companions (see Qur'an 4:69)," I said, "So, he does not choose us." Then I
realized that it was the application of the statement he used to relate to us
when he was healthy. So that was his last utterance (before he died), i.e. "O
Allah! (Let me join) the Highest Companions."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 360:
Narrated Qais:
I came to Khabbab who had been branded with seven brands(1) and he said,
"Had Allah's Apostle not forbidden us to invoke (Allah) for death, I would
have invoked (Allah) for it."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 361:
Narrated Qais:
I came to Khabbab who had been branded with seven brands over his
abdomen, and I heard him saying, "If the Prophet: had not forbidden us to
invoke (Allah) for death, I would have invoked Allah for it."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 362:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle said," None of you should long for death because of a
calamity that had befallen him, and if he cannot, but long for death, then he
should say, 'O Allah! Let me live as long as life is better for me, and take my
life if death is better for me.' "

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 363:
Narrated As-Sa'ib bin Yazid:
My aunt took me to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! My sister's
son is sick." So he passed his hand over my head and invoked for Allah's
blessing upon me and then performed the ablution. I drank from the water
of his ablution and I stood behind him and looked at his Khatam (the seal of
Prophethood) between his shoulders (and its size was) like the button of a
tent.

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 364:
Narrated Abu 'Aqil
that his grandfather. 'Abdullah bin Hisham used to take him from the market
or to the market (the narrator is in doubt) and used to buy grain and when
Ibn Az-Zubair and Ibn 'Umar met him, they would say to him, "Let us be your
partners (in trading) as the Prophet invoked for Allah's blessing upon you."
He would then take them as partners and he would Sometimes gain a whole
load carried by an animal which he would send home.

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 365:
Narrated Mahmud bin Ar-Rabi:
On whose face Allah's Apostle had thrown water from his mouth, the water
having been taken from their well while he was still a young boy (who has
not yet attained the age of puberty).

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 366:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The boys used to be brought to the Prophet and he used to invoke for
Allah's blessing upon them. Once an infant was brought to him and it
urinated on his clothes. He asked for water and poured it over the place of
the urine and did not wash his clothes.

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 367:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Tha'laba bin Su'air:
whose eye Allah's Apostle had touched, that he had seen Sa'd bin Abi
Waqqas offering one Rak'a only for the Witr prayer.

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 368:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Laila:
Ka'b bin 'Ujra met me and said, "Shall I give you a present? Once the Prophet
came to us and we said, 'O Allah's Apostle ! We know how to greet you; but
how to send 'Salat' upon you? He said, 'Say: Allahumma Salli ala
Muhammadin wa 'ala Ali Muhammadin, kama sal-laita 'ala all Ibrahima
innaka Hamidun Majid. Allahumma barik 'ala Muhammadin wa 'ala all
Muhammadin, kama barakta 'ala all Ibrahima, innaka Hamidun Majid."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 369:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
We said, "O Allah's Apostle This is (i.e. we know) the greeting to you; will
you tell us how to send Salat on you?" He said, "Say: 'Allahumma Salli 'ala
Muhammadin 'abdika wa rasulika kama sal-laita 'ala Ibrahima wa barik 'ala
Muhammadin wa all Muhammadin kama barakta 'ala Ibrahima wa Ali
Ibrahim."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 370:
Narrated Ibn Abi Aufa:
Whenever somebody brought alms to the Prophet the used to say,
"Allahumma Salli 'Alaihi (O Allah! Send Your Salat (Grace and Honor) on
him)." Once when my father brought his alms to him, he said, "O Allah! Send
Your Salat (Grace and Honor) on the family of Abi Aufa."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 371:
Narrated Abu Humaid As-Saidi:
The people said, "O Allah's Apostle ! How may we send Salat on you?" He
said, "Say: Allahumma Salli 'ala- Muhammadin wa azwajihi wa dhurriyyatihi
kama sal-laita 'ala ali Ibrahim; wa barik 'ala Muhammadin wa azwajihi wa
dhurriyyatihi kamabarakta 'ala ali Ibrahim innaka hamidun majid."
Volume 8, Book 75, Number 372:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
that he heard the Prophet saying, "O Allah! If I should ever abuse a believer,
please let that be a means of bringing him near to You on the Day of
Resurrection."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 373:
Narrated Anas:
Once the people started asking Allah's Apostle questions, and they asked so
many questions that he became angry and ascended the pulpit and said, "I
will answer whatever questions you may ask me today." I looked right and
left and saw everyone covering his face with his garment and weeping.
Behold ! There was a man who, on quarreling with the people, used to be
called as a son of a person other than his father. He said, "O Allah's Apostle!
Who is my father?" The Prophet replied, "Your father is Hudhaifa." And then
'Umar got up and said, "We accept Allah as our Lord, and Islam as (our)
religion, and Muhammad as (our) Apostle; and we seek refuge with Allah
from the afflictions." Allah's Apostle said, " I have never seen a day like
today in its good and its evil for Paradise and the Hell Fire were displayed in
front of me, till I saw them just beyond this wall." Qatada, when relating this
Hadith, used to mention the following Verse:-'O you who believe! Ask not questions about things which, If made plain to
you, May cause you trouble. (5.101)

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 374:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said to Abu Talha, "Choose one of your boys to serve me." So
Abu Talha took me (to serve the Prophet ) by giving me a ride behind him
(on his camel). So I used to serve Allah's Apostle whenever he stayed
somewhere. I used to hear him saying, "O Allah! I seek refuge with you
(Allah) from (worries) care and grief, from incapacity and laziness, from
miserliness and cowardice, from being heavily in debt and from being
overpowered by other men." I kept on serving him till he returned from (the
battle of) Khaibar. He then brought Safiya, the daughter of Huyay whom he
had got (from the booty). I saw him making a kind of cushion with a cloak or
a garment for her. He then let her ride behind him. When we reached a place
called As-Sahba', he prepared (a special meal called) Hais, and asked me to
invite the men who (came and) ate, and that was the marriage banquet
given on the consummation of his marriage to her. Then he proceeded till
the mountain of Uhud appeared, whereupon he said, "This mountain loves
us and we love it." When he approached Medina, he said, "O Allah! I make
the land between its (i.e., Medina's) two mountains a sanctuary, as the
prophet Abraham made Mecca a sanctuary. O Allah! Bless them (the people
of Medina) in their Mudd and the Sa' (units of measuring)."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 375:
Narrated Um Khalid bint Khalid:
I heard the Prophet seeking refuge with Allah from the punishment of the
grave.

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 376:
Narrated Mus'ab:
Sa'd used to recommend five (statements) and mentioned that the Prophet
I used to recommend it. (It was) "O Allah! I seek refuge with You from
miserliness; and seek refuge with You from cowardice; and seek refuge with
You from being sent back to geriatric old age; and I seek refuge with You
from the affliction of this world (i.e., the affliction of Ad-Dajjal etc.); and
seek refuge with You from the punishment of the grave."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 377:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Two old ladies from among the Jewish ladies entered upon me and said'
"The dead are punished in their graves," but I thought they were telling a lie
and did not believe them in the beginning. When they went away and the
Prophet entered upon me, I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Two old ladies.." and
told him the whole story. He said, "They told the truth; the dead are really
punished, to the extent that all the animals hear (the sound resulting from)
their punishment." Since then I always saw him seeking refuge with Allah
from the punishment of the grave in his prayers.

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 378:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Prophet used to say, "O Allah! I seek refuge with You from incapacity
and laziness, from cowardice and geriatric old age, and seek refuge with You
from the punishment of the grave, and I seek refuge with You from the
afflictions of life and death."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 379:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to say, "O Allah! I seek refuge with You from laziness and
geriatric old age, from all kinds of sins and from being in debt; from the
affliction of the Fire and from the punishment of the Fire and from the evil
of the affliction of wealth; and I seek refuge with You from the affliction of
poverty, and I seek refuge with You from the affliction of Al-Mesiah AdDajjal. O Allah! Wash away my sins with the water of snow and hail, and
cleanse my heart from all the sins as a white garment is cleansed from the
filth, and let there be a long distance between me and my sins, as You made
East and West far from each other."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 380:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet used to say, "O Allah! I seek refuge with You from worry and
grief, from incapacity and laziness, from cowardice and miserliness, from
being heavily in debt and from being overpowered by (other) men." (See
Hadith No. 374)

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 381:
Narrated Mus'ab bin Sa'd:
Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas used to recommend these five (statements) and say
that the Prophet said so (and they are): "O Allah! I seek refuge with You
from miserliness, and seek refuge with You from cowardice, and seek refuge
with You from being brought back to geriatric old age, and seek refuge with
You from the afflictions of the world, and seek refuge with You from the
punishment of the grave."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 382:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle used to seek refuge with Allah saying, "O Allah! I seek refuge
with You from laziness, and seek refuge with You from cowardice, and seek
refuge with You from geriatric old age, and seek refuge with You from
miserliness."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 383:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "O Allah! Make us love Medina as You made us love
Mecca, or more, and transfer the fever that is in it, to Al-Juhfa. O Allah! Bless
our Mudd and our Sam' (kinds of measures)."
Volume 8, Book 75, Number 384:
Narrated 'Amir bin Sa'd:
that his father said, "In the year of Hajjatal-Wada', the Prophet paid me a
visit while I was suffering from an ailment that had brought me to the verge
of death. I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! My sickness has reduced me to the (bad)
state as you see, and I am a rich man, but have no heirs except one
daughter. Shall I give 2/3 of my property in charity?' He said, 'No.' I said,
'Then 1/2 of it?' He said, 'Even 1/3 is too much, for, to leave your inheritors
wealthy is better than to leave them in poverty, begging from people. And
(know that) whatever you spend in Allah's Cause, you will get reward for it,
even for the morsel of food which you put in your wife's mouth.' I said, 'O
Allah's Apostle! Will I be left behind my companions (in Mecca)?' He said, 'If
you remain behind, whatever good deed you will do for Allah's Sake, will
raise and upgrade you to a higher position (in Allah's Sight). May be you will
live longer so that some people may benefit by you, and some e others
(pagans) may get harmed by you. O Allah! Complete the migration of my
companions and do not turn them on their heels; But (we pity) the poor Sa'd
bin Khaula (not the above mentioned Sa'd) (died in Mecca)" Allah's Apostle
lamented (or pitied) for him as he died in Mecca. (See Hadith No. 693, Vol. 5)

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 385:
Narrated Sa'd:
Seek refuge with Allah by saying the words which the Prophet used to say
while seeking refuge with Allah, "0 Allah! I seek refuge with You from
cowardice, and seek refuge with You from miserliness, and seek refuge with
You from reaching a degraded geriatric old age, and seek refuge with You
from the afflictions of the world and from the punishment in the grave."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 386:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to say, "O Allah! I seek refuge with You from laziness from
geriatric old age, from being in debt, and from committing sins. O Allah! I
seek refuge with You from the punishment of the Fire, the afflictions of the
grave, the punishment in the grave, and the evil of the affliction of poverty
and from the evil of the affliction caused by Al-Masih Ad-Dajjal. O Allah!
Wash away my sins with the water of snow and hail, and cleanse my heart
from the sins as a white garment is cleansed of filth, and let there be a far
away distance between me and my sins as You have set far away the East
and the West from each other."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 387:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to seek refuge with Allah (by saying), "O Allah! I seek
refuge with You from the affliction of the Fire and from the punishment in
the Fire, and seek refuge with You from the affliction of the grave, and I
seek refuge with You from the affliction of wealth, and I seek refuge with
You from the affliction of poverty, and seek refuge with You from the
affliction of Al-Masih Ad-Dajjal."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 388:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to say, 'O Allah! I seek refuge with You from the affliction
of the Fire, the punishment of the Fire, the affliction of the grave, the
punishment of the grave, and the evil of the affliction of poverty. O Allah! I
seek refuge with You from the evil of the affliction of Al-Masih Ad-Dajjal, O
Allah! Cleanse my heart with the water of snow and hail, and cleanse my
heart from all sins as a white garment is cleansed from filth, and let there be
a far away distance between me and my sins as You made the East and West
far away from each other. O Allah! I seek refuge with You from laziness, sins,
and from being in debt."
Volume 8, Book 75, Number 389:
Narrated Um Sulaim:
that she said, "O Allah's Apostle! Anas is your servant, so please invoke for
Allah's blessing for him." The Prophet said, "O Allah! Increase his wealth and
offspring and bless (for him) whatever You give him."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 390:
Narrated Anas:
Um Sulaim said (to the Prophet), "Anas is your servant; so please invoke for
Allah's blessings for him." He said "O Allah! Increase his wealth and
offspring, and Bless (for him) whatever You give him."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 391:
Narrated Jabir:
The Prophet used to teach us the Istikhara for each and every matter as he
used to teach us the Suras from the Holy Qur'an. (He used to say), "If
anyone of you intends to do something, he should offer a two-Rak'at prayer
other than the obligatory prayer, and then say: 'Allahumma inni astakhiruka
bi'ilmika, wa astaqdiruka biqudratika, wa as'aluka min fadlika-l-'azim, fa
innaka taqdiru wala aqdiru, wa ta'lamu wala a'lamu, wa anta'allamu-lghuyub. Allahumma in kunta ta'lamu anna hadha-lamra khairun li fi dini wa
ma'ashi wa 'aqibati amri (or said, fi 'ajili amri wa ajilihi) fa-qdurhu li, Wa in
junta ta'lamu anna ha-dha-l-amra sharrun li fi dini wa ma'ashi wa 'aqibati
amri (or said, fi ajili amri wa ajilihi) fasrifhu 'anni was-rifni 'anhu wa aqdur li
alkhaira haithu kana, thumma Raddani bihi," Then he should mention his
matter (need).

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 392:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet asked for some water and performed the ablution, and then
raised his hands (towards the sky) and said, "O Allah! Forgive 'Ubaid Abi
'Amir." I saw the whiteness of his armpits (while he was raising his hands)
and he added, "O Allah! Upgrade him over many of Your human creatures
on the Day of Resurrection "

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 393:
Narrated Abu Musa:
We were in the company of the Prophet on a journey, and whenever we
ascended a high place, we used to say Takbir (in a loud voice). The Prophet
said, "O people! Be kind to yourselves, for you are not calling upon a deaf or
an absent one, but You are calling an All-Hearer, and an All-Seer." Then he
came to me as I was reciting silently, "La haul a wala quwwata illa bil-lah."
He said, "O 'Abdullah bin Qais! Say: La haul a walaquwata illa bil-lah, for it is
one of the treasures of Paradise." Or he said, "Shall I tell you a word which is
one of the treasures of Paradise? It is: La haul a wala quwwata illa bil-lah."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 394:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
Whenever Allah's Apostle returned from a Ghazwa or Hajj or 'Umra, he used
to say, "Allahu Akbar," three times; whenever he went up a high place, he
used to say, "La ilaha illal-lahu wahdahu la sharika lahu, lahu-l-mulk wa lahu-lhamd, wa huwa'ala kulli Shai 'in qadir. Ayibuna ta'ibuna 'abiduna lirabbina
hamidun. Sadaqa-l-lahu wa'dahu, wa nasara'abdahu wa hazama-l-ahzaba
wahdahu."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 395:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet seeing a yellow mark (of perfume) on the clothes of 'AbdurRahman bin 'Auf, said, "What about you?" 'Abdur-Rahman replied, "I have
married a woman with a Mahr of gold equal to a date-stone." The Prophet
said, "May Allah bestow His Blessing on you (in your marriage). Give a
wedding banquet, (Walima) even with one sheep."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 396:
Narrated Jabir:
My father died and left behind seven or nine daughters, and I married a
woman. The Prophet said, "Did you get married, O Jabir?" I replied, "Yes."
He asked, "Is she a virgin or a matron?" I replied, "She is a matron." He said,
"Why didn't you marry a virgin girl so that you might play with her and she
with you (or, you might make her laugh and she make you laugh)?" I said,
"My father died, leaving seven or nine girls (orphans) and I did not like to
bring a young girl like them, so I married a woman who can look after
them." He said, "May Allah bestow His Blessing on you."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 397:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "If anyone of you, when intending to have a sexual
intercourse with his wife, says: 'Bismillah, Allahumma jannibna-sh-shaitan,
wa jannibi-sh-shaitan ma razaqtana,' and if the couple are destined to have a
child (out of that very sexual relation), then Satan will never be able to harm
that child."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 398:
Narrated Anas:
The most frequent invocation of The Prophet was: "O Allah! Give to us in the
world that which is good and in the Hereafter that which is good, and save
us from the torment of the Fire." (2.201)

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 399:
Narrated Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas:
The Prophet used to teach us these words as he used to teach us the Book
(Qur'an): "O Allah! seek refuge with You from miserliness, and seek refuge
with You from cowardice, and seek refuge with You from being brought
back to (senile) geriatric old age, and seek refuge with You from the
affliction of the world and from the punishment in the Hereafter."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 400:
Narrated 'Aisha:
that Allah's Apostle was affected by magic, so much that he used to think
that he had done something which in fact, he did not do, and he invoked his
Lord (for a remedy). Then (one day) he said, "O 'Aisha!) Do you know that
Allah has advised me as to the problem I consulted Him about?" 'Aisha said,
"O Allah's Apostle! What's that?" He said, "Two men came to me and one of
them sat at my head and the other at my feet, and one of them asked his
companion, 'What is wrong with this man?' The latter replied, 'He is under
the effect of magic.' The former asked, 'Who has worked magic on him?' The
latter replied, 'Labid bin Al-A'sam.' The former asked, 'With what did he
work the magic?' The latter replied, 'With a comb and the hair, which are
stuck to the comb, and the skin of pollen of a date-palm tree.' The former
asked, 'Where is that?' The latter replied, 'It is in Dharwan.' Dharwan was a
well in the dwelling place of the (tribe of) Bani Zuraiq. Allah's Apostle went
to that well and returned to 'Aisha, saying, 'By Allah, the water (of the well)
was as red as the infusion of Hinna, (1) and the date-palm trees look like the
heads of devils.' 'Aisha added, Allah's Apostle came to me and informed me
about the well. I asked the Prophet, 'O Allah's Apostle, why didn't you take
out the skin of pollen?' He said, 'As for me, Allah has cured me and I hated to
draw the attention of the people to such evil (which they might learn and
harm others with).' "
Narrated Hisham's father: 'Aisha said, "Allah's Apostle was bewitched, so he
invoked Allah repeatedly requesting Him to cure him from that magic)."
Hisham then narrated the above narration. (See Hadith No. 658, Vol. 7)

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 401:
Narrated Ibn Abi Aufa:
Allah's Apostle asked for Allah's wrath upon the Ahzab (confederates),
saying, "O Allah, the Revealer of the Holy Book, and the One swift at
reckoning! Defeat the confederates; Defeat them and shake them."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 402:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
When the Prophet said, "Sami' al-lahu Liman hamidah (Allah heard him who
sent his praises to Him)" in the last Rak'a of the 'Isha' prayer, he used to
invoke Allah, saying, "O Allah! Save 'Aiyash bin Abi Rabi'a; O Allah! Save AlWalid bin Al-Walid; O Allah! Save the weak people among the believers; O
Allah! Be hard on the Tribe of Mudar; O Allah! Inflict years of drought upon
them like the years (of drought) of the Prophet Joseph."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 403:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet sent a Sariya (an army detachment) consisting of men called AlQurra', and all of them were martyred. I had never seen the Prophet so sad
over anything as he was over them. So he said Qunut (invocation in the
prayer) for one month in the Fajr prayer, invoking for Allah's wrath upon the
tribe of 'Usaiya, and he used to say, "The people of 'Usaiya have disobeyed
Allah and His Apostle."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 404:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Jews used to greet the Prophet by saying, "As-Samu 'Alaika (i.e., death
be upon you), so I understood what they said, and I said to them, "As-Samu
'alaikum wal-la'na (i.e. Death and Allah's Curse be upon you)." The Prophet
said, "Be gentle and calm, O 'Aisha, as Allah likes gentleness in all affairs." I
said, "O Allah's Prophet! Didn't you hear what they said?" He said, "Didn't
you hear me answering them back by saying, 'Alaikum (i.e., the same be
upon you)?"

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 405:
Narrated 'Ali bin Abi Talib:
We were in the company of the Prophet on the day (of the battle) of AlKhandaq (the Trench). The Prophet said, "May Allah fill their (the infidels')
graves and houses with fire, as they have kept us so busy that we could not
offer the middle prayer till the sun had set; and that prayer was the 'Asr
prayer."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 406:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
At-Tufail bin 'Amr came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! The
tribe of Daus has disobeyed (Allah and His Apostle) and refused (to embrace
Islam), therefore, invoke Allah's wrath for them." The people thought that
the Prophet would invoke Allah's wrath for them, but he said, "O Allah!
Guide the tribe Of Daus and let them come to us,"
Volume 8, Book 75, Number 407:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet used to invoke Allah with the following invocation: 'Rabbi-ghfirli Khati 'ati wa jahli wa israfi fi amri kullihi, wa ma anta a'lamu bihi minni.
Allahumma ighfirli khatayaya wa 'amdi, wa jahli wa jiddi, wa kullu
dhalika'indi. Allahumma ighrifli ma qaddamtu wa ma akhartu wa ma asrartu
wa ma a'lantu. Anta-l-muqaddimu wa anta-l-mu'akh-khiru, wa anta 'ala kulli
shai'in qadir.'

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 408:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari:
The Prophet used to invoke Allah, saying, "Allahumma ighfirli khati'ati wa
jahli wa israfi fi amri, wa ma anta a-'lamu bihi minni. Allahumma ighfirli hazali
wa jiddi wa khata'i wa amdi, wa kullu dhalika 'indi"

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 409:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Abu-l-Qasim (the Prophet) said, "On Friday there is a particular time. If a
Muslim happens to be praying and invoking Allah for something good during
that time, Allah will surely fulfill his request." The Prophet pointed out with
his hand. We thought that he wanted to illustrate how short that time was.

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 410:
Narrated Ibn Abi Mulaika:
'Aisha said, "The Jews came to the Prophet and said to him, "As-Samu
'Alaika (i.e., Death be upon you)." He replied, 'The same on you.' " 'Aisha
said to them, "Death be upon you, and may Allah curse you and shower His
wrath upon you!" Allah's Apostle I said, "Be gentle and calm, O 'Aisha! Be
gentle and beware of being harsh and of saying evil things." She said,
"Didn't you hear what they said?" He said, "Didn't you hear what I replied
(to them)? have returned their statement to them, and my invocation
against them will be accepted but theirs against me will not be accepted."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 411:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "When the Imam says 'Amin', then you should all say
'Amin', for the angels say 'Amin' at that time, and he whose 'Amin' coincides
with the 'Amin' of the angels, all his past sins will be forgiven."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 412:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said," Whoever says: "La ilaha illal-lah wahdahu la sharika
lahu, lahu-l-mulk wa lahu-l-hamd wa huwa 'ala kulli shai'in qadir," one
hundred times will get the same reward as given for manumitting ten slaves;
and one hundred good deeds will be written in his accounts, and one
hundred sins will be deducted from his accounts, and it (his saying) will be a
shield for him from Satan on that day till night, and nobody will be able to do
a better deed except the one who does more than he."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 413:
Narrated 'Amr bin Maimun:
Whoever recites it (i.e., the invocation in the above Hadith (412) ten times
will be as if he manumitted one of Ishmael's descendants. Abu Aiyub
narrated the same Hadith from the Prophet saying, "(Whoever recites it ten
times) will be as if he had manumitted one of Ishmael's descendants."
Volume 8, Book 75, Number 414:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever says, 'Subhan Allah wa bihamdihi,' one
hundred times a day, will be forgiven all his sins even if they were as much as
the foam of the sea.

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 415:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "There are two expressions which are very easy for the
tongue to say, but they are very heavy in the balance and are very dear to
The Beneficent (Allah), and they are, 'Subhan Allah Al-'Azim and 'Subhan
Allah wa bihamdihi.'"

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 416:
Narrated Abu Musa: The Prophet said, "The example of the one who
celebrates the Praises of his Lord (Allah) in comparison to the one who does
not celebrate the Praises of his Lord, is that of a living creature compared to
a dead one."

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 417:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah 's Apostle said, "Allah has some angels who look for those who
celebrate the Praises of Allah on the roads and paths. And when they find
some people celebrating the Praises of Allah, they call each other, saying,
"Come to the object of your pursuit.' " He added, "Then the angels encircle
them with their wings up to the sky of the world." He added. "(after those
people celebrated the Praises of Allah, and the angels go back), their Lord,
asks them (those angels)----though He knows better than them----'What do
My slaves say?' The angels reply, 'They say: Subhan Allah, Allahu Akbar, and
Alham-du-lillah, Allah then says 'Did they see Me?' The angels reply, 'No! By
Allah, they didn't see You.'
Allah says, How it would have been if they saw Me?' The angels reply, 'If
they saw You, they would worship You more devoutly and celebrate Your
Glory more deeply, and declare Your freedom from any resemblance to
anything more often.' Allah says (to the angels), 'What do they ask Me for?'
The angels reply, 'They ask You for Paradise.' Allah says (to the angels), 'Did
they see it?' The angels say, 'No! By Allah, O Lord! They did not see it.' Allah
says, How it would have been if they saw it?' The angels say, 'If they saw it,
they would have greater covetousness for it and would seek It with greater
zeal and would have greater desire for it.' Allah says, 'From what do they
seek refuge?' The angels reply, 'They seek refuge from the (Hell) Fire.' Allah
says, 'Did they see it?' The angels say, 'No By Allah, O Lord! They did not see
it.' Allah says, How it would have been if they saw it?' The angels say, 'If they
saw it they would flee from it with the extreme fleeing and would have
extreme fear from it.' Then Allah says, 'I make you witnesses that I have
forgiven them."' Allah's Apostle added, "One of the angels would say,
'There was so-and-so amongst them, and he was not one of them, but he
had just come for some need.' Allah would say, 'These are those people
whose companions will not be reduced to misery.' "

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 418:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari:
The Prophet started ascending a high place or hill. A man (amongst his
companions) ascended it and shouted in a loud voice, "La ilaha illal-lahu
wallahu Akbar." (At that time) Allah's Apostle was riding his mule. Allah's
Apostle said, "You are not calling upon a deaf or an absent one." and added,
"O Abu Musa (or, O 'Abdullah)! Shall I tell you a sentence from the treasure
of Paradise?" I said, "Yes." He said, "La haul a wala quwwata illa billah,"

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 419:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah has ninety-nine Names, i.e., one hundred minus one, and whoever
believes in their meanings and acts accordingly, will enter Paradise; and
Allah is Witr (one) and loves 'the Witr' (i.e., odd numbers).

Volume 8, Book 75, Number 420:
Narrated Shaqiq:
While we were waiting for 'Abdullah (bin Mas'ud). Yazid bin Muawiya came.
I said (to him), "Will you sit down?" He said, "No, but I will go into the house
(of Ibn Mas'ud) and let your companion (Ibn Mas'ud) come out to you; and
if he should not (come out), I will come out and sit (with you)." Then
'Abdullah came out, holding the hand of Yazid, addressed us, saying, "I
know that you are assembled here, but the reason that prevents me from
coming out to you, is that Allah's Apostle used to preach to us at intervals
during the days, lest we should become bored."
BOOK 76. TO MAKE THE HEART TENDER (AR-RIQAQ) (421-592)
Volume 8, Book 76, Number 421:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "There are two blessings which many people lose: (They
are) Health and free time for doing good."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 422:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "O Allah! There is no life worth living except the life of the
Hereafter, so (please) make righteous the Ansar and the Emigrants."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 423:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd As-Sa'idi:
We were in the company of Allah's Apostle in (the battle of) Al-Khandaq,
and he was digging the trench while we were carrying the earth away. He
looked at us and said, "O Allah! There is no life worth living except the life of
the Hereafter, so (please) forgive the Ansar and the Emigrants."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 424:
Narrated Sahl:
I heard the Prophet saying, "A (small) place equal to an area occupied by a
whip in Paradise is better than the (whole) world and whatever is in it; and
an undertaking (journey) in the forenoon or in the afternoon for Allah's
Cause, is better than the whole world and whatever is in it."
Volume 8, Book 76, Number 425:
Narrated Mujahid:
'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle took hold of my shoulder and said,
'Be in this world as if you were a stranger or a traveler." The sub-narrator
added: Ibn 'Umar used to say, "If you survive till the evening, do not expect
to be alive in the morning, and if you survive till the morning, do not expect
to be alive in the evening, and take from your health for your sickness, and
(take) from your life for your death."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 426:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet drew a square and then drew a line in the middle of it and let it
extend outside the square and then drew several small lines attached to
that central line, and said, "This is the human being, and this, (the square) in
his lease of life, encircles him from all sides (or has encircled him), and this
(line), which is outside (the square), is his hope, and these small lines are the
calamities and troubles (which may befall him), and if one misses him, another will snap (i.e. overtake) him, and if the other misses him, a third will
snap (i.e. overtake) him."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 427:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet drew a few lines and said, "This is (man's) hope, and this is the
instant of his death, and while he is in this state (of hope), the nearer line
(death) comes to Him."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 428:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah will not accept the excuse of any person whose
instant of death is delayed till he is sixty years of age."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 429:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "The heart of an old man remains young in
two respects, i.e., his love for the world (its wealth, amusements and
luxuries) and his incessant hope."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 430:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "The son of Adam (i.e. man) grows old and so also two
(desires) grow old with him, i.e., love for wealth and (a wish for) a long life."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 431:
Narrated 'Utban bin Malik Al-Ansari:
who was one of the men of the tribe of Bani Salim: Allah's Apostle came to
me and said, "If anybody comes on the Day of Resurrection who has said: La
ilaha illal-lah, sincerely, with the intention to win Allah's Pleasure, Allah will
make the Hell-Fire forbidden for him."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 432:
Narrated Abu Huraira: Allah's Apostle said, "Allah says, 'I have nothing to
give but Paradise as a reward to my believer slave, who, if I cause his dear
friend (or relative) to die, remains patient (and hopes for Allah's Reward)."
Volume 8, Book 76, Number 433:
Narrated 'Amr bin 'Auf:
(an ally of the tribe of Bani 'Amir bin Lu'ai and one of those who had
witnessed the battle of Badr with Allah's Apostle) Allah's Apostle sent Abu
'Ubaida bin AlJarrah to Bahrain to collect the Jizya tax. Allah's Apostle had
concluded a peace treaty with the people of Bahrain and appointed Al 'Ala
bin Al-Hadrami as their chief; Abu Ubaida arrived from Bahrain with the
money. The Ansar heard of Abu 'Ubaida's arrival which coincided with the
Fajr (morning) prayer led by Allah's Apostle. When the Prophet finished the
prayer, they came to him. Allah's Apostle smiled when he saw them and
said, "I think you have heard of the arrival of Abu 'Ubaida and that he has
brought something." They replied, "Yes, O Allah's Apostle! " He said, "Have
the good news, and hope for what will please you. By Allah, I am not afraid
that you will become poor, but I am afraid that worldly wealth will be given
to you in abundance as it was given to those (nations) before you, and you
will start competing each other for it as the previous nations competed for
it, and then it will divert you (from good) as it diverted them." '

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 434:
Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir:
The Prophet went out and offered the funeral prayer for the martyrs of the
(battle of) Uhud and then ascended the pulpit and said, "I am your
predecessor and I am a witness against you. By Allah, I am now looking at
my Tank-lake (Al-Kauthar) and I have been given the keys of the treasures of
the earth (or the keys of the earth). By Allah! I am not afraid that after me
you will worship others besides Allah, but I am afraid that you will start
competing for (the pleasures of) this world."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 435:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle said, "The thing I am afraid of most for your sake, is the
worldly blessings which Allah will bring forth to you." It was said, "What are
the blessings of this world?" The Prophet said, "The pleasures of the world."
A man said, "Can the good bring forth evil?" The Prophet kept quiet for a
while till we thought that he was being inspired divinely. Then he started
removing the sweat from his forehead and said," Where is the questioner?"
That man said, "I (am present)." Abu Sa'id added: We thanked the man
when the result (of his question) was such. The Prophet said, "Good never
brings forth but good. This wealth (of the world) is (like) green and sweet
(fruit), and all the vegetation which grows on the bank of a stream either
kills or nearly kills the animal that eats too much of it, except the animal that
eats the Khadira (a kind of vegetation). Such an animal eats till its stomach is
full and then it faces the sun and starts ruminating and then it passes out
dung and urine and goes to eat again. This worldly wealth is (like) sweet
(fruit), and if a person earns it (the wealth) in a legal way and spends it
properly, then it is an excellent helper, and whoever earns it in an illegal
way, he will be like the one who eats but is never satisfied."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 436:
Narrated Zahdam bin Mudarrib:
'Imran bin Husain said: The Prophet said, "The best people are my
contemporaries (i.e., the present (my) generation) and then those who
come after them (i.e., the next generation)." Imran added: I am not sure
whether the Prophet repeated the statement twice after his first saying. The
Prophet added, "And after them there will come people who will bear
witness, though they will not be asked to give their witness; and they will be
treacherous and nobody will trust them, and they will make vows, but will
not fulfill them, and fatness will appear among them."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 437:
Narrated 'Abdullah :
The Prophet said, "The best people are those of my generation, and then
those who will come after them (the next generation), and then those who
will come after them (i.e. the next generation), and then after them, there
will come people whose witness will precede their oaths, and whose oaths
will precede their witness."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 438:
Narrated Qais:
I heard Khabbab, who had branded his abdomen with seven brands, saying,
"Had Allah's Apostle not forbidden us to invoke Allah for death, I would
have invoked Allah for death. The companions of Muhammad have left this
world without taking anything of their reward in it (i.e., they will have
perfect reward in the Hereafter), but we have collected of the worldly
wealth what we cannot spend but on earth (i.e. on building houses)."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 439:
Narrated Qais:
I came to Khabbab while he was building a wall, and he (Khabbab) said, "Our
companions who have left this world, did not enjoy anything of their reward
therein, while we have collected after them, much wealth that we cannot
spend but on earth (i.e., on building)."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 440:
Narrated Khabbab:
We migrated with the Prophet..(This narration is related in the chapter of
migration).

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 441:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
I brought water to Uthman bin 'Affan to perform the ablution while he was
sitting on his seat. He performed the ablution in a perfect way and said, "I
saw the Prophet performing the ablution in this place and he performed it in
a perfect way and said, "Whoever performs the ablution as I have done this
time and then proceeds to the mosque and offers a two-Rak'at prayer and
then sits there (waiting for the compulsory congregational prayers), then all
his past sins will be forgiven." The Prophet further added, "Do not be
conceited (thinking that your sins will be forgiven because of your prayer)."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 442:
Narrated Mirdas Al-Aslami:
The Prophet said, "The righteous (pious people will depart (die) in
succession one after the other, and there will remain (on the earth) useless
people like the useless husk of barley seeds or bad dates, and Allah will not

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 443:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Perish the slave of Dinar, Dirham, Qatifa (thick soft
cloth), and Khamisa (a garment), for if he is given, he is pleased; otherwise
he is dissatisfied."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 444:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
I heard the Prophet saying, "If the son of Adam (the human being) had two
valley of money, he would wish for a third, for nothing can fill the belly of
Adam's son except dust, and Allah forgives him who repents to Him."
Volume 8, Book 76, Number 445:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "If the son of Adam had money equal to a
valley, then he will wish for another similar to it, for nothing can satisfy the
eye of Adam's son except dust. And Allah forgives him who repents to Him."
Ibn 'Abbas said: I do not know whether this saying was quoted from the
Qur'an or not. 'Ata' said, "I heard Ibn AzZubair saying this narration while he
was on the pulpit."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 446:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:
I heard Ibn Az-Zubair who was on the pulpit at Mecca, delivering a sermon,
saying, "O men! The Prophet used to say, "If the son of Adam were given a
valley full of gold, he would love to have a second one; and if he were given
the second one, he would love to have a third, for nothing fills the belly of
Adam's son except dust. And Allah forgives he who repents to Him." Ubai
said, "We considered this as a saying from the Qur'an till the Sura (beginning
with) 'The mutual rivalry for piling up of worldly things diverts you..' (102.1)
was revealed."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 447:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "If Adam's son had a valley full of gold, he would like to
have two valleys, for nothing fills his mouth except dust. And Allah forgives
him who repents to Him."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 448:
Narrated Hakim bin Hizam:
I asked the Prophet (for some money) and he gave me, and then again I
asked him and he gave me, and then again I asked him and he gave me and
he then said, "This wealth is (like) green and sweet (fruit), and whoever
takes it without greed, Allah will bless it for him, but whoever takes it with
greed, Allah will not bless it for him, and he will be like the one who eats but
is never satisfied. And the upper (giving) hand is better than the lower
(taking) hand."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 449:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "Who among you considers the wealth of his heirs dearer
to him than his own wealth?" They replied, "O Allah's Apostle! There is none
among us but loves his own wealth more." The Prophet said, "So his wealth
is whatever he spends (in Allah's Cause) during his life (on good deeds)
while the wealth of his heirs is whatever he leaves after his death."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 450:
Narrated Abu Dhar:
Once I went out at night and found Allah's Apostle walking all alone
accompanied by nobody, and I thought that perhaps he disliked that
someone should accompany him. So I walked in the shade, away from the
moonlight, but the Prophet looked behind and saw me and said, "Who is
that?" I replied, "Abu Dhar, let Allah get me sacrificed for you!" He said, "O
Abu Dhar, come here!" So I accompanied him for a while and then he said,
"The rich are in fact the poor (little rewarded) on the Day of Resurrection
except him whom Allah gives wealth which he gives (in charity) to his right,
left, front and back, and does good deeds with it. I walked with him a little
longer. Then he said to me, "Sit down here." So he made me sit in an open
space surrounded by rocks, and said to me, "Sit here till I come back to you."
He went towards Al-Harra till I could not see him, and he stayed away for a
long period, and then I heard him saying, while he was coming, "Even if he
had committed theft, and even if he had committed illegal sexual
intercourse?" When he came, I could not remain patient and asked him, "O
Allah's Prophet! Let Allah get me sacrificed for you! Whom were you
speaking to by the side of Al-Harra? I did not hear anybody responding to
your talk." He said, "It was Gabriel who appeared to me beside Al-Harra and
said, 'Give the good news to your followers that whoever dies without
having worshipped anything besides Allah, will enter Paradise.' I said, 'O
Gabriel! Even if he had committed theft or committed illegal sexual
intercourse?' He said, 'Yes.' I said, 'Even if he has committed theft or
committed illegal sexual intercourse?' He said, 'Yes.' I said, 'Even if he has
committed theft or committed illegal sexual intercourse?' He said, 'Yes.' "

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 451:
Narrated Abu Dhar:
While I was walking with the Prophet in the Harra of Medina, Uhud came in
sight. The Prophet said, "O Abu Dhar!" I said, "Labbaik, O Allah's Apostle!"
He said, "I would not like to have gold equal to this mountain of Uhud,
unless nothing of it, not even a single Dinar of it remains with me for more
than three days, except something which I will keep for repaying debts. I
would have spent all of it (distributed it) amongst Allah's Slaves like this, and
like this, and like this." The Prophet pointed out with his hand towards his
right, his left and his back (while illustrating it). He proceeded with his walk
and said, "The rich are in fact the poor (little rewarded) on the Day of
Resurrection except those who spend their wealth like this, and like this,
and like this, to their right, left and back, but such people are few in
number." Then he said to me, "Stay at your place and do not leave it till I
come back." Then he proceeded in the darkness of the night till he went out
of sight, and then I heard a loud voice, and was afraid that something might
have happened to the Prophet .1 intended to go to him, but I remembered
what he had said to me, i.e. 'Don't leave your place till I come back to you,'
so I remained at my place till he came back to me. I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I
heard a voice and I was afraid." So I mentioned the whole story to him. He
said, "Did you hear it?" I replied, "Yes." He said, "It was Gabriel who came to
me and said, 'Whoever died without joining others in worship with Allah, will
enter Paradise.' I asked (Gabriel), 'Even if he had committed theft or
committed illegal sexual intercourse? Gabriel said, 'Yes, even if he had
committed theft or committed illegal sexual intercourse."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 452:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah Apostle said, "If I had gold equal to the mountain of Uhud, it would not
please me that anything of it should remain with me after three nights (i.e., I
would spend all of it in Allah's Cause) except what I would keep for repaying
debts."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 453:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Riches does not mean, having a great amount of
property, but riches is self-contentment."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 454:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd As-Sa'id:
A man passed by Allah's Apostle and the Prophet asked a man sitting beside
him, "What is your opinion about this (passer-by)?" He replied, "This (passerby) is from the noble class of people. By Allah, if he should ask for a lady's
hand in marriage, he ought to be given her in marriage, and if he intercedes
for somebody, his intercession will be accepted. Allah's Apostle kept quiet,
and then another man passed by and Allah's Apostle asked the same man
(his companion) again, "What is your opinion about this (second) one?" He
said, "O Allah's Apostle! This person is one of the poor Muslims. If he should
ask a lady's hand in marriage, no-one will accept him, and if he intercedes for
somebody, no one will accept his intercession, and if he talks, no-one will
listen to his talk." Then Allah's Apostle said, "This (poor man) is better than
such a large number of the first type (i.e. rich men) as to fill the earth."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 455:
Narrated Abu Wail:
We paid a visit to Khabbab who was sick, and he said, "We migrated with
the Prophet for Allah's Sake and our wages became due on Allah. Some of
us died without having received anything of the wages, and one of them
was Mus'ab bin 'Umar, who was martyred on the day of the battle of Uhud,
leaving only one sheet (to shroud him in). If we covered his head with it, his
feet became uncovered, and if we covered his feet with it, his head became
uncovered. So the Prophet ordered us to cover his head with it and put
some Idhkhir (a kind of grass) over his feet. On the other hand, some of us
have had the fruits (of our good deed) and are plucking them (in this
world)."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 456:
Narrated 'Imran bin Husain:
The Prophet said, "I looked into Paradise and found that the majority of its
dwellers were the poor people, and I looked into the (Hell) Fire and found
that the majority of its dwellers were women."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 457:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet did not eat at a table till he died, and he did not eat a thin nicely
baked wheat bread till he died.

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 458:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When the Prophet died, nothing which can be eaten by a living creature was
left on my shelf except some barley grain. I ate of it for a period and when I
measured it, it finished.

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 459:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
By Allah except Whom none has the right to- be worshipped, (sometimes) I
used to lay (sleep) on the ground on my liver (abdomen) because of hunger,
and (sometimes) I used to bind a stone over my belly because of hunger.
One day I sat by the way from where they (the Prophet and h is
companions) used to come out. When Abu Bakr passed by, I asked him
about a Verse from Allah's Book and I asked him only that he might satisfy
my hunger, but he passed by and did not do so. Then Umar passed by me
and I asked him about a Verse from Allah's Book, and I asked him only that
he might satisfy my hunger, but he passed by without doing so. Finally Abu-lQasim (the Prophet ) passed by me and he smiled when he saw me, for he
knew what was in my heart and on my face. He said, "O Aba Hirr (Abu
Huraira)!" I replied, "Labbaik, O Allah's Apostle!" He said to me, "Follow
me." He left and I followed him.
Then he entered the house and I asked permission to enter and was
admitted. He found milk in a bowl and said, "From where is this milk?" They
said, "It has been presented to you by such-and-such man (or by such and
such woman)." He said, "O Aba Hirr!" I said, "Labbaik, O Allah's Apostle!" He
said, "Go and call the people of Suffa to me." These people of Suffa were
the guests of Islam who had no families, nor money, nor anybody to depend
upon, and whenever an object of charity was brought to the Prophet , he
would send it to them and would not take anything from it, and whenever
any present was given to him, he used to send some for them and take
some of it for himself. The order off the Prophet upset me, and I said to
myself, "How will this little milk be enough for the people of As-Suffa?"
thought I was more entitled to drink from that milk in order to strengthen
myself, but behold! The Prophet came to order me to give that milk to them.
I wondered what will remain of that milk for me, but anyway, I could not but
obey Allah and His Apostle so I went to the people of As-Suffa and called
them, and they came and asked the Prophet's permission to enter. They
were admitted and took their seats in the house.
The Prophet said, "O Aba-Hirr!" I said, "Labbaik, O Allah's Apostle!" He said,
"Take it and give it to them." So I took the bowl (of Milk) and started giving
it to one man who would drink his fill and return it to me, whereupon I
would give it to another man who, in his turn, would drink his fill and return
it to me, and I would then offer it to another man who would drink his fill
and return it to me. Finally, after the whole group had drunk their fill, I
reached the Prophet who took the bowl and put it on his hand, looked at me
and smiled and said. "O Aba Hirr!" I replied, "Labbaik, O Allah's Apostle!" He
said, "There remain you and I." I said, "You have said the truth, O Allah's
Apostle!" He said, "Sit down and drink." I sat down and drank. He said,
"Drink," and I drank. He kept on telling me repeatedly to drink, till I said,
"No. by Allah Who sent you with the Truth, I have no space for it (in my
stomach)." He said, "Hand it over to me." When I gave him the bowl, he
praised Allah and pronounced Allah's Name on it and drank the remaining
milk.

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 460:
Narrated Sa'd:
I was the first man among the Arabs to throw an arrow for Allah's Cause. We
used to fight in Allah's Cause while we had nothing to eat except the leaves
of the Hubla and the Sumur trees (desert trees) so that we discharged
excrement like that of sheep (i.e. unmixed droppings). Today the (people of
the) tribe of Bani Asad teach me the laws of Islam. If so, then I am lost, and
all my efforts of that hard time had gone in vain.

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 461:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The family of Muhammad had never eaten their fill of wheat bread for three
successive days since they had migrated to Medina till the death of the
Prophet.

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 462:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The family of Muhammad did not eat two meals on one day, but one of the
two was of dates.

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 463:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The bed mattress of the Prophet was made of a leather case stuffed with
palm fibres.

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 464:
Narrated Qatada:
We used to go to Anas bin Malik and see his baker standing (preparing the
bread). Anas said, "Eat. I have not known that the Prophet ever saw a thin
well-baked loaf of bread till he died, and he never saw a roasted sheep with
his eyes."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 465:
Narrated 'Aisha:
A complete month would pass by during which we would not make a fire
(for cooking), and our food used to be only dates and water unless we were
given a present of some meat.

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 466:
Narrated 'Aisha:
that she said to Urwa, "O, the son of my sister! We used to see three
crescents in two months, and no fire used to be made in the houses of
Allah's Apostle (i.e. nothing used to be cooked)." 'Urwa said, "What used to
sustain you?" 'Aisha said, "The two black things i.e. dates and water, except
that Allah's Apostle had neighbors from the Ansar who had some milch shecamels, and they used to give the Prophet some milk from their house, and
he used to make us drink it."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 467:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "O Allah! Give food to the family of Muhammad."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 468:
Narrated Masruq:
I asked 'Aisha "What deed was the most beloved to the Prophet?" She said,
"The regular constant one." I said, "At what time did he use to get up at
night (for the Tahajjud night prayer)?' She said, "He used to get up on
hearing (the crowing of) the cock (the last third of the night)."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 469:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The most beloved action to Allah's Apostle was that whose doer did it
continuously and regularly.

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 470:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The deeds of anyone of you will not save you (from the
(Hell) Fire)." They said, "Even you (will not be saved by your deeds), O
Allah's Apostle?" He said, "No, even I (will not be saved) unless and until
Allah bestows His Mercy on me. Therefore, do good deeds properly,
sincerely and moderately, and worship Allah in the forenoon and in the
afternoon and during a part of the night, and always adopt a middle,
moderate, regular course whereby you will reach your target (Paradise)."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 471:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said, "Do good deeds properly, sincerely and moderately and
know that your deeds will not make you enter Paradise, and that the most
beloved deed to Allah's is the most regular and constant even though it
were little."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 472:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet was asked, "What deeds are loved most by Allah?" He said,
"The most regular constant deeds even though they may be few." He
added, 'Don't take upon yourselves, except the deeds which are within your
ability."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 473:
Narrated 'Alqama:
I asked 'Aisha, mother of the believers, "O mother of the believers! How
were the deeds of the Prophet? Did he use to do extra deeds of worship on
special days?" She said, "No, but his deeds were regular and constant, and
who among you is able to do what the Prophet was able to do (i.e. in
worshipping Allah)?"

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 474:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "Do good deeds properly, sincerely and moderately, and
receive good news because one's good deeds will not make him enter
Paradise." They asked, "Even you, O Allah's Apostle?" He said, "Even I,
unless and until Allah bestows His pardon and Mercy on me."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 475:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Once Allah's Apostle led us in prayer and then (after finishing it) ascended
the pulpit and pointed with his hand towards the Qibla of the mosque and
said, "While I was leading you in prayer, both Paradise and Hell were
displayed in front of me in the direction of this wall. I had never seen a
better thing (than Paradise) and a worse thing (than Hell) as I have seen
today, I had never seen a better thing and a worse thing as I have seen
today."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 476:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, Verily Allah created Mercy. The day He
created it, He made it into one hundred parts. He withheld with Him ninetynine parts, and sent its one part to all His creatures. Had the non-believer
known of all the Mercy which is in the Hands of Allah, he would not lose
hope of entering Paradise, and had the believer known of all the
punishment which is present with Allah, he would not consider himself safe
from the Hell-Fire."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 477:
Narrated Abu Said:
Some people from the Ansar asked Allah's Apostle (to give them something)
and he gave to everyone of them, who asked him, until all that he had was
finished. When everything was finished and he had spent all that was in his
hand, he said to them, '"(Know) that if I have any wealth, I will not withhold
it from you (to keep for somebody else); And (know) that he who refrains
from begging others (or doing prohibited deeds), Allah will make him
contented and not in need of others; and he who remains patient, Allah will
bestow patience upon him, and he who is satisfied with what he has, Allah
will make him self-sufficient. And there is no gift better and vast (you may be
given) than patience."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 478:
Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba:
The Prophet used to pray so much that his feet used to become edematous
or swollen, and when he was asked as to why he prays so much, he would
say, "Shall I not be a thankful slave (to Allah)?"

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 479:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Allah's Apostle said, "Seventy thousand people of my followers will enter
Paradise without accounts, and they are those who do not practice Ar-
Ruqya and do not see an evil omen in things, and put their trust in their
Lord.

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 480:
Narrated Warrad:
(the clerk of Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba) Muawiya wrote to Al-Mughira: "Write to
me a narration you have heard from Allah's Apostle." So Al-Mughira wrote
to him, "I heard him saying the following after each prayer: 'La ilaha illal-lahu
wahdahu la sharika lahu, lahu-l-mulk wa lahuI-hamd, wa huwa 'ala kulli Shaiin qadir.' He also used to forbid idle talk, asking too many questions (in
religion), wasting money, preventing what should be given, and asking
others for something (except in great need), being undutiful to mothers,
and burying one's little daughters (alive)."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 481:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever can guarantee (the chastity of) what is
between his two jaw-bones and what is between his two legs (i.e. his
tongue and his private parts), I guarantee Paradise for him."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 482:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day should talk
what is good or keep quiet, and whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day
should not hurt (or insult) his neighbor; and whoever believes in Allah and
the Last Day, should entertain his guest generously."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 483:
Narrated Abu Shuraih Al-Khuza'i:
My ears heard and my heart grasped (the statement which) the Prophet
said, "The period for keeping one's guest is three days (and don't forget) his
reward." It was asked, "What is his reward?" He said, "In the first night and
the day he should be given a high class quality of meals; and whoever
believes in Allah and the Last Day, should entertain his guest generously;
and whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day should talk what is good
(sense) or keep quiet."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 484:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
That he heard Allah's Apostle saying, "A slave of Allah may utter a word
without thinking whether it is right or wrong, he may slip down in the Fire as
far away a distance equal to that between the east."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 485:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet; said, "A slave (of Allah) may utter a word which pleases Allah
without giving it much importance, and because of that Allah will raise him
to degrees (of reward): a slave (of Allah) may utter a word (carelessly)
which displeases Allah without thinking of its gravity and because of that he
will be thrown into the Hell-Fire."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 486:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said Allah will give shade to seven (types of people) under His
Shade (on the Day of Resurrection). (one of them will be) a person who
remembers Allah and his eyes are then flooded with tears.
Volume 8, Book 76, Number 487:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
The Prophet said, "There was a man amongst the people who had suspicion
as to the righteousness of his deeds. Therefore he said to his family, 'If I die,
take me and burn my corpse and throw my ashes into the sea on a hot (or
windy) day.' They did so, but Allah, collected his particles and asked (him),
What made you do what you did?' He replied, 'The only thing that made me
do it, was that I was afraid of You.' So Allah forgave him."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 488:
Narrated Abu Said :
The Prophet mentioned a man from the previous generation or from the
people preceding your age whom Allah had given both wealth and children.
The Prophet said, "When the time of his death approached, he asked his
children, 'What type of father have I been to you?' They replied: You have
been a good father. He said, 'But he (i.e. your father) has not stored any
good deeds with Allah (for the Hereafter): if he should face Allah, Allah will
punish him. So listen, (O my children), when I die, burn my body till I become
mere coal and then grind it into powder, and when there is a stormy wind,
throw me (my ashes) in it.' So he took a firm promise from his children (to
follow his instructions). And by Allah they (his sons) did accordingly(fulfilled
their promise.) Then Allah said, "Be"' and behold! That man was standing
there! Allah then said. "O my slave! What made you do what you did?" That
man said, "Fear of You." So Allah forgave him.

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 489:
Narrated Abu Musa:
Allah's Apostle said. "My example and the example of the message with
which Allah has sent me is like that of a man who came to some people and
said, "I have seen with my own eyes the enemy forces, and I am a naked
warner (to you) so save yourself, save yourself! A group of them obeyed him
and went out at night, slowly and stealthily and were safe, while another
group did not believe him and thus the army took them in the morning and
destroyed them."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 490:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "My example and the example of the people
is that of a man who made a fire, and when it lighted what was around it,
Moths and other insects started falling into the fire. The man tried (his best)
to prevent them, (from falling in the fire) but they overpowered him and
rushed into the fire. The Prophet added: Now, similarly, I take hold of the
knots at your waist (belts) to prevent you from falling into the Fire, but you
insist on falling into it."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 491:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
The Prophet said, "A Muslim is the one who avoids harming Muslims with his
tongue or his hands. And a Muhajir (an emigrant) is the one who gives up
(abandons) all what Allah has forbidden."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 492:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If you knew that which I know you would laugh little
and weep much."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 493:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "If you knew that which I know, you would laugh little and
weep much."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 494:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The (Hell) Fire is surrounded by all kinds of desires and
passions, while Paradise is surrounded by all kinds of disliked undesirable
things."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 495:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "Paradise is nearer to any of you than the Shirak (leather
strap) of his shoe, and so is the (Hell) Fire.

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 496:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The truest poetic verse ever said by a poet, is: Indeed!
Everything except Allah, is perishable."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 497:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If anyone of you looked at a person who was made
superior to him in property and (in good) appearance, then he should also
look at the one who is inferior to him, and to whom he has been made
superior."
Volume 8, Book 76, Number 498:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet narrating about his Lord I'm and said, "Allah ordered (the
appointed angels over you) that the good and the bad deeds be written,
and He then showed (the way) how (to write). If somebody intends to do a
good deed and he does not do it, then Allah will write for him a full good
deed (in his account with Him); and if he intends to do a good deed and
actually did it, then Allah will write for him (in his account) with Him (its
reward equal) from ten to seven hundred times to many more times: and if
somebody intended to do a bad deed and he does not do it, then Allah will
write a full good deed (in his account) with Him, and if he intended to do it
(a bad deed) and actually did it, then Allah will write one bad deed (in his
account) ."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 499:
Narrated Ghailan:
Anas said "You people do (bad) deeds (commit sins) which seem in your
eyes as tiny (minute) than hair while we used to consider those (very deeds)
during the life-time of the Prophet as destructive sins."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 500:
Narrated Sa'd bin Sahl As-Sa'idi:
The Prophet looked at a man fighting against the pagans and he was one of
the most competent persons fighting on behalf of the Muslims. The Prophet
said, "Let him who wants to look at a man from the dwellers of the (Hell)
Fire, look at this (man)." Another man followed him and kept on following
him till he (the fighter) was injured and, seeking to die quickly, he placed the
blade tip of his sword between his breasts and leaned over it till it passed
through his shoulders (i.e., committed suicide)." The Prophet added, "A
person may do deeds that seem to the people as the deeds of the people of
Paradise while in fact, he is from the dwellers of the (Hell) Fire: and similarly
a person may do deeds that seem to the people as the deeds of the people
of the (Hell) Fire while in fact, he is from the dwellers of Paradise. Verily, the
(results of) deeds done, depend upon the last actions."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 501:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
A bedouin came to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Who is the best
of mankind!" The Prophet said, "A man who strives for Allah's Cause with his
life and property, and also a man who lives (all alone) in a mountain path
among the mountain paths to worship his Lord and save the people from his
evil."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 503:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "When honesty is lost, then wait for the Hour." It was
asked, "How will honesty be lost, O Allah's Apostle?" He said, "When
authority is given to those who do not deserve it, then wait for the Hour."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 504:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
Allah's Apostle narrated to us two narrations, one of which I have seen
(happening) and I am waiting for the other. He narrated that honesty was
preserved in the roots of the hearts of men (in the beginning) and then the
learnt it (honesty) from the Qur'an, and then they learnt it from the
(Prophet's) Sunna (tradition). He also told us about its disappearance,
saying, "A man will go to sleep whereupon honesty will be taken away from
his heart, and only its trace will remain, resembling the traces of fire. He
then will sleep whereupon the remainder of the honesty will also be taken
away (from his heart) and its trace will resemble a blister which is raised
over the surface of skin, when an ember touches one's foot; and in fact, this
blister does not contain anything. So there will come a day when people will
deal in business with each other but there will hardly be any trustworthy
persons among them. Then it will be said that in such-and-such a tribe there
is such-and-such person who is honest, and a man will be admired for his
intelligence, good manners and strength, though indeed he will not have
belief equal to a mustard seed in his heart." The narrator added: There came
upon me a time when I did not mind dealing with anyone of you, for if he
was a Muslim, his religion would prevent him from cheating; and if he was a
Christian, his Muslim ruler would prevent him from cheating; but today I
cannot deal except with so-and-so and so-and-so. (See Hadith No. 208, Vol.
9)

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 505:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "People are just like camels, out of one
hundred, one can hardly find a single camel suitable to ride."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 506:
Narrated Jundub:
The Prophet said, "He who lets the people hear of his good deeds
intentionally, to win their praise, Allah will let the people know his real
intention (on the Day of Resurrection), and he who does good things in
public to show off and win the praise of the people, Allah will disclose his
real intention (and humiliate him).
Volume 8, Book 76, Number 507:
Narrated Mu'adh bin Jabal:
While I was riding behind the Prophet as a companion rider and there was
nothing between me and him except the back of the saddle, he said, "O
Mu'adh!" I replied, "Labbaik O Allah's Apostle! And Sa'diak!" He proceeded
for a while and then said, "O Mu'adh!" I said, "Labbaik and Sa'daik, O Allah's
Apostle!" He then proceeded for another while and said, "O Mu'adh bin
Jabal!" I replied, "Labbaik, O Allah's Apostle, and Sa'daik!" He said, "Do you
know what is Allah's right on His slaves?" I replied, "Allah and His Apostle
know better." He said, "Allah's right on his slaves is that they should worship
Him and not worship anything besides Him." He then proceeded for a while,
and again said, "O Mu'adh bin Jabal!" I replied. "Labbaik, O Allah's Apostle,
and Sa'daik." He said, "Do you know what is (Allah's) slaves' (people's) right
on Allah if they did that?" I replied, "Allah and His Apostle know better." He
said, "The right of (Allah's) slaves on Allah is that He should not punish them
(if they did that)."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 508:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet had a she-camel called Al'Adba' and it was too fast to surpass in
speed. There came a bedouin riding a camel of his, and that camel
outstripped it (i.e. Al-Aqba'). That result was hard on the Muslims who said
sorrowfully, "Al- Adba has been outstripped." Allah's Apostle said, "It is due
from Allah that nothing would be raised high in this world except that He
lowers or puts it down."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 509:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah said, 'I will declare war against him who shows
hostility to a pious worshipper of Mine. And the most beloved things with
which My slave comes nearer to Me, is what I have enjoined upon him; and
My slave keeps on coming closer to Me through performing Nawafil
(praying or doing extra deeds besides what is obligatory) till I love him, so I
become his sense of hearing with which he hears, and his sense of sight with
which he sees, and his hand with which he grips, and his leg with which he
walks; and if he asks Me, I will give him, and if he asks My protection
(Refuge), I will protect him; (i.e. give him My Refuge) and I do not hesitate
to do anything as I hesitate to take the soul of the believer, for he hates
death, and I hate to disappoint him."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 510:
Narrated Sahl:
Allah's Apostle said, "I have been sent and the Hour (is at hand) as these
two," showing his two fingers and sticking (separating) them out.

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 511:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle said, "I have been sent and the Hour (is at hand) as these
two (fingers)."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 512:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "I have been sent and the Hour (is at hand) as these two
(fingers)."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 513:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The Hour will not be established till the sun rises from
the west, and when it rises (from the west) and the people see it, then all of
them will believe (in Allah). But that will be the time when 'No good it will
do to a soul to believe then. If it believed not before.."' (6.158)
The Hour will be established (so suddenly) that two persons spreading a
garment between them will not be able to finish their bargain, nor will they
be able to fold it up. The Hour will be established while a man is carrying the
milk of his she-camel, but cannot drink it; and the Hour will be established
when someone is not able to prepare the tank to water his livestock from it;
and the Hour will be established when some of you has raised his food to his
mouth but cannot eat it."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 514:
Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit:
The Prophet said, "Who-ever loves to meet Allah, Allah (too) loves to meet
him and who-ever hates to meet Allah, Allah (too) hates to meet him".
'Aisha, or some of the wives of the Prophet said, "But we dislike death." He
said: It is not like this, but it is meant that when the time of the death of a
believer approaches, he receives the good news of Allah's pleasure with him
and His blessings upon him, and so at that time nothing is dearer to him than
what is in front of him. He therefore loves the meeting with Allah, and Allah
(too) loves the meeting with him. But when the time of the death of a
disbeliever approaches, he receives the evil news of Allah's torment and His
Requital, whereupon nothing is more hateful to him than what is before
him. Therefore, he hates the meeting with Allah, and Allah too, hates the
meeting with him."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 515:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "Whoever loves the meeting with Allah, Allah too, loves
the meeting with him; and whoever hates the meeting with Allah, Allah too,
hates the meeting with him."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 516:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) When Allah's Apostle was in good health, he used
to say, "No prophet's soul is ever captured unless he is shown his place in
Paradise and given the option (to die or survive)." So when the death of the
Prophet approached and his head was on my thigh, he became unconscious
for a while and then he came to his senses and fixed his eyes on the ceiling
and said, "O Allah (with) the highest companions." (See Qur'an 4:69). I said'
"Hence he is not going to choose us." And I came to know that it was the
application of the narration which he (the Prophet) used to narrate to us.
And that was the last statement of the Prophet (before his death) i.e., "O
Allah! With the highest companions." (See Qur'an 4:69)

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 517:
Narrated 'Aisha:
There was a leather or wood container full of water in front of Allah's
Apostle (at the time of his death). He would put his hand into the water and
rub his face with it, saying, "None has the right to be worshipped but Allah!
No doubt, death has its stupors." Then he raised his hand and started saying,
"(O Allah!) with the highest companions." (See Qur'an 4:69) (and kept on
saying it) till he expired and his hand dropped."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 518:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Some rough bedouins used to visit the Prophet and ask him, "When will the
Hour be?" He would look at the youngest of all of them and say, "If this
should live till he is very old, your Hour (the death of the people addressed)
will take place." Hisham said that he meant (by the Hour), their death.

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 519:
Narrated Abu Qatada bin Rib'i Al-Ansari:
A funeral procession passed by Allah's Apostle who said, "Relieved or
relieving?" The people asked, "O Allah's Apostle! What is relieved and
relieving?" He said, "A believer is relieved (by death) from the troubles and
hardships of the world and leaves for the Mercy of Allah, while (the death
of) a wicked person relieves the people, the land, the trees, (and) the
animals from him."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 520:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
The Prophet said, "Relieved or relieving. And a believer is relieved (by
death)."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 521:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "When carried to his grave, a dead person is followed
by three, two of which return (after his burial) and one remains with him: his
relative, his property, and his deeds follow him; relatives and his property go
back while his deeds remain with him."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 522:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar
Allah's Apostle said, "When anyone of you dies, his destination is displayed
before him in the forenoon and in the afternoon, either in the (Hell) Fire or
in Paradise, and it is said to him, "That is your place till you are resurrected
and sent to it."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 523:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "Do not abuse the dead, for they have reached the result
of what they have done."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 524:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Two men, a Muslim and a Jew, abused each other. The Muslim said, "By Him
Who gave superiority to Muhammad over all the people." On that, the Jew
said, "By Him Who gave superiority to Moses over all the people." The
Muslim became furious at that and slapped the Jew in the face. The Jew
went to Allah's Apostle and informed him of what had happened between
him and the Muslim. Allah's Apostle said, "Don't give me superiority over
Moses, for the people will fall unconscious on the Day of Resurrection and I
will be the first to gain consciousness, and behold ! Moses will be there
holding the side of Allah's Throne. I will not know whether Moses has been
among those people who have become unconscious and then has regained
consciousness before me, or has been among those exempted by Allah from
falling unconscious."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 525:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The people will fall down unconscious at the time when
they should fall down (i.e., on the Day of Resurrection), and then I will be
the first man to get up, and behold, Moses will be there holding (Allah's)
Throne. I will not know whether he has been amongst those who have fallen
unconscious."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 526:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah will take the whole earth (in His Hand) and will roll
up the Heaven in His right Hand, and then He will say, "I am King! Where are
the kings of the earth ? "

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 527:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said, "The (planet of) earth will be a bread on the Day of
Resurrection, and The resistible (Allah) will topple turn it with His Hand like
anyone of you topple turns a bread with his hands while (preparing the
bread) for a journey, and that bread will be the entertainment for the
people of Paradise." A man from the Jews came (to the Prophet) and said,
"May The Beneficent (Allah) bless you, O Abul Qasim! Shall I tell you of the
entertainment of the people of Paradise on the Day of Resurrection?" The
Prophet said, "Yes." The Jew said, "The earth will be a bread," as the
Prophet had said. Thereupon the Prophet looked at us and smiled till his
premolar tooth became visible. Then the Jew further said, "Shall I tell you of
the udm (additional food taken with bread) they will have with the bread?"
He added, "That will be Balam and Nun." The people asked, "What is that?"
He said, "It is an ox and a fish, and seventy thousand people will eat of the
caudate lobe (i.e. extra lobe) of their livers."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 528:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:
I heard the Prophet saying, "The people will be gathered on the Day of
Resurrection on reddish white land like a pure loaf of bread (made of pure
fine flour)." Sahl added: That land will have no landmarks for anybody (to
make use of).

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 529:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The people will be gathered in three ways: (The first way
will be of) those who will wish or have a hope (for Paradise) and will have a
fear (of punishment), (The second batch will be those who will gather)
riding two on a camel or three on a camel or ten on a camel. (The third
batch) the rest of the people will be urged to gather by the Fire which will
accompany them at the time of their afternoon nap and stay with them
where they will spend the night, and will be with them in the morning
wherever they may be then, and will be with them in the afternoon
wherever they may be then."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 530:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
A man said, "O Allah's Prophet! Will a Kafir (disbeliever) be gathered (driven
prone) on his face?" The Prophet said, "Is not He Who made him walk with
his legs in this world, able to make him walk on his face on the Day of
Resurrection?" (Qatada, a sub-narrator said: Yes, (He can), by the Power of
Our Lord!")

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 531:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet said, "You will meet Allah barefooted, naked, walking on feet,
and uncircumcised."
Volume 8, Book 76, Number 532:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
I heard Allah's Apostle while he was delivering a sermon on a pulpit, saying,
"You will meet Allah barefooted, naked, and uncircumcised."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 533:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet stood up among us and addressed (saying) "You will be
gathered, barefooted, naked, and uncircumcised (as Allah says): 'As We
began the first creation, We shall repeat it..' (21.104) And the first human
being to be dressed on the Day of Resurrection will be (the Prophet)
Abraham Al-Khalil. Then will be brought some men of my followers who will
be taken towards the left (i.e., to the Fire), and I will say: 'O Lord! My
companions whereupon Allah will say: You do not know what they did after
you left them. I will then say as the pious slave, Jesus said, And I was witness
over them while I dwelt amongst them..........(up to) ...the All-Wise.' (5.117118). The narrator added: Then it will be said that those people (relegated
from Islam, that is) kept on turning on their heels (deserted Islam).

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 534:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said, "The people will be gathered barefooted, naked, and
uncircumcised." I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Will the men and the women look
at each other?" He said, "The situation will be too hard for them to pay
attention to that."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 535:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
While we were in the company of the Prophet in a tent he said, ''Would it
please you to be one fourth of the people of Paradise?" We said, "Yes." He
said, "Would It please you to be one-third of the people of Paradise?" We
said, "Yes." He said, "Would it please you to be half of the people of
Paradise?" We said, "Yes." Thereupon he said, "I hope that you will be one
half of the people of Paradise, for none will enter Paradise but a Muslim
soul, and you people, in comparison to the people who associate others in
worship with Allah, are like a white hair on the skin of a black ox, or a black
hair on the skin of a red ox."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 536:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The first man to be called on the Day of Resurrection will
be Adam who will be shown his offspring, and it will be said to them, 'This is
your father, Adam.' Adam will say (responding to the call), 'Labbaik and
Sa'daik' Then Allah will say (to Adam), 'Take out of your offspring, the
people of Hell.' Adam will say, 'O Lord, how many should I take out?' Allah
will say, 'Take out ninety-nine out of every hundred." They (the Prophet's
companions) said, "O Allah's Apostle! If ninety-nine out of every one
hundred of us are taken away, what will remain out of us?" He said, "My
followers in comparison to the other nations are like a white hair on a black
ox."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 537:
Narrated Abu Said:
The Prophet said, "Allah will say, 'O Adam!. Adam will reply, 'Labbaik and
Sa'daik (I respond to Your Calls, I am obedient to Your orders), wal Khair fi
Yadaik (and all the good is in Your Hands)!' Then Allah will say (to Adam),
Bring out the people of the Fire.' Adam will say, 'What (how many) are the
people of the Fire?' Allah will say, 'Out of every thousand (take out) nine-
hundred and ninety-nine (persons).' At that time children will become hoaryheaded and every pregnant female will drop her load (have an abortion) and
you will see the people as if they were drunk, yet not drunk; But Allah's
punishment will be very severe."
That news distressed the companions of the Prophet too much, and they
said, "O Allah's Apostle! Who amongst us will be that man (the lucky one out
of one-thousand who will be saved from the Fire)?" He said, "Have the good
news that one-thousand will be from Gog and Magog, and the one (to be
saved will be) from you." The Prophet added, "By Him in Whose Hand my
soul is, I Hope that you (Muslims) will be one third of the people of
Paradise." On that, we glorified and praised Allah and said, "Allahu Akbar."
The Prophet then said, "By Him in Whose Hand my soul is, I hope that you
will be one half of the people of Paradise, as your (Muslims) example in
comparison to the other people (non-Muslims), is like that of a white hair on
the skin of a black ox, or a round hairless spot on the foreleg of a donkey."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 538:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said (regarding the Verse), "A Day when all mankind will stand
before the Lord of the Worlds,' (that day) they will stand, drowned in their
sweat up to the middle of their ears."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 539:
Narrated Abu Huraira :
Allah's Apostle said, "The people will sweat so profusely on the Day of
Resurrection that their sweat will sink seventy cubits deep into the earth,
and it will rise up till it reaches the people's mouths and ears."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 540:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "The cases which will be decided first (on the Day of
Resurrection) will be the cases of blood-shedding. "

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 541:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever has wronged his brother, should ask for his
pardon (before his death), as (in the Hereafter) there will be neither a Dinar
nor a Dirham. (He should secure pardon in this life) before some of his good
deeds are taken and paid to his brother, or, if he has done no good deeds,
some of the bad deeds of his brother are taken to be loaded on him (in the
Hereafter)."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 542:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle said, "The believers, after being saved from the (Hell) Fire,
will be stopped at a bridge between Paradise and Hell and mutual retaliation
will be established among them regarding wrongs they have committed in
the world against one another. After they are cleansed and purified
(through the retaliation), they will be admitted into Paradise; and by Him in
Whose Hand Muhammad's soul is, everyone of them will know his dwelling
in Paradise better than he knew his dwelling in this world."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 543:
Narrated Ibn Abi Mulaika:
'Aisha said, "The Prophet said, 'Anybody whose account (record) is
questioned will surely be punished.' I said, 'Doesn't Allah say: 'He surely will
receive an easy reckoning?' (84.8) The Prophet replied. 'This means only the
presentation of the account."'
Volume 8, Book 76, Number 544:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said (as above, 543).

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 545:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle, said, "None will be called to account on the Day of
Resurrection, but will be ruined." I said "O Allah's Apostle! Hasn't Allah said:
'Then as for him who will be given his record in his right hand, he surely will
receive an easy reckoning? (84.7-8) -- Allah's Apostle said, "That (Verse)
means only the presentation of the accounts, but anybody whose account
(record) is questioned on the Day of Resurrection, will surely be punished."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 546:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Prophet used to say, "A disbeliever will be brought on the Day of
Resurrection and will be asked. "Suppose you had as much gold as to fill the
earth, would you offer it to ransom yourself?" He will reply, "Yes." Then it
will be said to him, "You were asked for something easier than that (to join
none in worship with Allah (i.e. to accept Islam, but you refused)."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 547:
Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim:
The Prophet said, "There will be none among you but will be talked to by
Allah on the Day of Resurrection, without there being an interpreter
between him and Him (Allah) . He will look and see nothing ahead of him,
and then he will look (again for the second time) in front of him, and th
(Hell) Fire will confront him. So, whoever among you can save himself from
the Fire, should do so even with one half of a date (to give in charity)."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 548:
Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim:
The Prophet said, "Protect yourself from the Fire." He then turned his face
aside (as if he were looking at it) and said again, "Protect yourself from the
Fire," and then turned his face aside (as if he were looking at it), and he said
so for the third time till we thought he was looking at it. He then said,
"Protect yourselves from the Fire, even if with one half of a date and he who
hasn't got even this, (should do so) by (saying) a good, pleasant word.'

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 549:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "The people were displayed in front of me and I saw one
prophet passing by with a large group of his followers, and another prophet
passing by with only a small group of people, and another prophet passing
by with only ten (persons), and another prophet passing by with only five
(persons), and another prophet passed by alone. And then I looked and saw
a large multitude of people, so I asked Gabriel, "Are these people my
followers?' He said, 'No, but look towards the horizon.' I looked and saw a
very large multitude of people. Gabriel said. 'Those are your followers, and
those are seventy thousand (persons) in front of them who will neither have
any reckoning of their accounts nor will receive any punishment.' I asked,
'Why?' He said, 'For they used not to treat themselves with branding
(cauterization) nor with Ruqya (get oneself treated by the recitation of
some Verses of the Qur'an) and not to see evil omen in things, and they
used to put their trust (only) in their Lord." On hearing that, 'Ukasha bin
Mihsan got up and said (to the Prophet), "Invoke Allah to make me one of
them." The Prophet said, "O Allah, make him one of them." Then another
man got up and said (to the Prophet), "Invoke Allah to make me one of
them." The Prophet said, 'Ukasha has preceded you."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 550:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "From my followers there will enter Paradise
a crowd, seventy thousand in number whose faces will glitter as the moon
does when it is full." On hearing that, 'Ukasha bin Mihsan Al-Asdi got up,
lifting his covering sheet, and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah that He
may make me one of them." The Prophet said, "O Allah, make him one of
them." Another man from the Ansar got up and said, "O Allah's Apostle!
Invoke Allah to make me one of them. "The Prophet said (to him), "'Ukasha
has preceded you."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 551:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:
The Prophet said, "Seventy-thousand or seven-hundred thousand of my
followers (the narrator is in doubt as to the correct number) will enter
Paradise holding each other till the first and the last of them enter Paradise
at the same time, and their faces will have a glitter like that of the moon at
night when it is full."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 552:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet; said, "The people of Paradise will enter Paradise, and the
people of the (Hell) Fire will enter the (Hell) Fire: then a call-maker will get
up (and make an announcement) among them, 'O the people of the (Hell)
Fire! No death anymore ! And O people of Paradise! No death (anymore) but
Eternity."
Volume 8, Book 76, Number 553:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, " It will be said to the people of Paradise, 'O people of
Paradise! Eternity (for you) and no death,' and to the people of the Fire, 'O
people of the Fire, eternity (for you) and no death!"

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 554:
Narrated 'Imran:
The Prophet said, "I looked into paradise and saw that the majority of its
people were the poor, and I looked into the Fire and found that the majority
of its people were women."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 555:
Narrated Usama:
The Prophet said, "I stood at the gate of Paradise and saw that the majority
of the people who had entered it were poor people, while the rich were
forbidden (to enter along with the poor, because they were waiting the
reckoning of their accounts), but the people of the Fire had been ordered to
be driven to the Fire. And I stood at the gate of the Fire and found that the
majority of the people entering it were women."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 556:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "When the people of Paradise have entered Paradise
and the people of the Fire have entered the Fire, death will be brought and
will be placed between the Fire and Paradise, and then it will be slaughtered,
and a call will be made (that), 'O people of Paradise, no more death ! 
people of the Fire, no more death ! ' So the people of Paradise will have
happiness added to their previous happiness, and the people of the Fire will
have sorrow added to their previous sorrow."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 557:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah will say to the people of Paradise, 'O the people
of Paradise!' They will say, 'Labbaik, O our Lord, and Sa'daik!' Allah will say,
'Are you pleased?" They will say, 'Why should we not be pleased since You
have given us what You have not given to anyone of Your creation?' Allah
will say, 'I will give you something better than that.' They will reply, 'O our
Lord! And what is better than that?' Allah will say, 'I will bestow My pleasure
and contentment upon you so that I will never be angry with you after forever.' "

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 558:
Narrated Anas:
Haritha was martyred on the day (of the battle) of Badr while he was young.
His mother came to the Prophet saying, "O Allah's Apostle! You know the
relation of Haritha to me (how fond of him I was); so, if he is in Paradise, I
will remain patient and wish for Allah's reward, but if he is not there, then
you will see what I will do." The Prophet replied, "May Allah be merciful
upon you! Have you gone mad? (Do you think) it is one Paradise? There are
many Paradises and he is in the (most superior) Paradise of Al-Firdaus."
8.559.:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The width between the two shoulders of a Kafir
(disbeliever) will be equal to the distance covered by a fast rider in three
days."
Volume 8, Book 76, Number 559t:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:
Allah's Apostle said, "In Paradise there is a tree so big that in its shade a rider
may travel for one hundred years without being able to cross it."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 559e:
Narrated Abu Sa'id:
The Prophet said: There is a tree in Paradise (so huge) that a fast (or a
trained) rider may travel: for one hundred years without being able to cross
it.

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 560:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:
Allah's Apostle said, "Seventy thousand or seven hundred thousand of my
followers will enter Paradise. (Abu Hazim, the sub-narrator, is not sure as to
which of the two numbers is correct.) And they will be holding on to one
another, and the first of them will not enter till the last of them has entered,
and their faces will be like the moon on a full moon night."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 561:
Narrated Sahl:
The Prophet said, "The people of Paradise will see the Ghuraf (special
abodes) in Paradise as you see a star in the sky." Abu Said added: "As you
see a glittering star remaining in the eastern horizon and the western
horizon."
Volume 8, Book 76, Number 562:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "Allah will say to the person who will have the minimum
punishment in the Fire on the Day of Resurrection, 'If you had things equal
to whatever is on the earth, would you ransom yourself (from the
punishment) with it?' He will reply, Yes. Allah will say, 'I asked you a much
easier thing than this while you were in the backbone of Adam, that is, not
to worship others besides Me, but you refused and insisted to worship
others besides Me."'

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 563:
Narrated Hammad from 'Amr from Jabir:
The Prophet said, "Some people will come out of the Fire through
intercession looking like The Thaarir." I asked 'Amr, "What is the Thaarir?"
He said, Ad Daghabis, and at that time he was toothless. Hammad added: I
said to 'Amr bin Dinar, "O Abu Muhammad! Did you hear Jabir bin 'Abdullah
saying, 'I heard the Prophet saying: 'Some people will come out of the Fire
through intercession?" He said, "Yes. "

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 564:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "Some people will come out of the Fire after they have
received a touch of the Fire, changing their color, and they will enter
Paradise, and the people of Paradise will name them 'Al-Jahannamiyin' the
(Hell) Fire people."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 565:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle said, "When the people of Paradise have entered Paradise,
and the people of the Fire have entered the Fire, Allah will say. 'Take out (of
the Fire) whoever has got faith equal to a mustard seed in his heart.' They
will come out, and by that time they would have burnt and became like coal,
and then they will be thrown into the river of Al-Hayyat (life) and they will
spring up just as a seed grows on the bank of a rainwater stream." The
Prophet said, "Don't you see that the germinating seed comes out yellow
and twisted?"

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 566:
Narrated An-Nu'man:
I heard the Prophet saying, "The person who will have the least punishment
from amongst the Hell Fire people on the Day of Resurrection, will be a man
under whose arch of the feet a smoldering ember will be placed so that his
brain will boil because of it."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 567:
Narrated An-Nu'man bin Bashir:
I heard the Prophet saying, "The least punished person of the (Hell) Fire
people on the Day of Resurrection will be a man under whose arch of the
feet two smoldering embers will be placed, because of which his brain will
boil just like Al-Mirjal (copper vessel) or a Qum-qum (narrow-necked vessel)
is boiling with water."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 568:
Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim:
The Prophet mentioned the Fire and turned his face aside and asked for
Allah's protection from it, and then again he mentioned the Fire and turned
his face aside and asked for Allah's protection from it and said, "Protect
yourselves from the Hell-Fire, even if with one half of a date, and he who
cannot afford that, then (let him do so) by (saying) a good, pleasant word."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 569:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
I heard Allah's Apostles when his uncle, Abu Talib had been mentioned in his
presence, saying, "May be my intercession will help him (Abu Talib) on the
Day of Resurrection so that he may be put in a shallow place in the Fire, with
fire reaching his ankles and causing his brain to boil."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 570:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah will gather all the people on the Day of
Resurrection and they will say, 'Let us request someone to intercede for us
with our Lord so that He may relieve us from this place of ours.' Then they
will go to Adam and say, 'You are the one whom Allah created with His Own
Hands, and breathed in you of His soul, and ordered the angels to prostrate
to you; so please intercede for us with our Lord.' Adam will reply, 'I am not
fit for this undertaking, and will remember his sin, and will say, 'Go to Noah,
the first Apostle sent by Allah' They will go to him and he will say, 'I am not
fit for this undertaking', and will remember his sin and say, 'Go to Abraham
whom Allah took as a Khalil. They will go to him (and request similarly). He
will reply, 'I am not fit for this undertaking,' and will remember his sin and
say, 'Go to Moses to whom Allah spoke directly.' They will go to Moses and
he will say, 'I am not fit for this undertaking,' and will remember his sin and
say, 'Go to Jesus.' They will go to him, and he will say, 'I am not fit for this
undertaking, go to Muhammad as Allah has forgiven his past and future
sins.' They will come to me and I will ask my Lord's permission, and when I
see Him, I will fall down in prostration to Him, and He will leave me in that
state as long as (He) Allah will, and then I will be addressed. 'Raise up your
head (O Muhammad)! Ask, and your request will be granted, and say, and
your saying will be listened to; intercede, and your intercession will be
accepted.' Then I will raise my head, and I will glorify and praise my Lord
with a saying(i.e. invocation) He will teach me, and then I will intercede,
Allah will fix a limit for me (i.e., certain type of people for whom I may
intercede), and I will take them out of the (Hell) Fire and let them enter
Paradise. Then I will come back (to Allah) and fall in prostration, and will do
the same for the third and fourth times till no-one remains in the (Hell) Fire
except those whom the Qur'an has imprisoned therein." (The sub-narrator,
Qatada used to say at that point, "...those upon whom eternity (in Hell) has
been imposed.") (See Hadith No. 3, Vol 6).

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 571:
Narrated 'Imran bin Husain:
The Prophet said, "Some people will be taken out of the Fire through the
intercession of Muhammad they will enter Paradise and will be called AlJahannamiyin (the Hell Fire people)."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 572:
Narrated Anas:
Um (the mother of) Haritha came to Allah's Apostle after Haritha had been
martyred on the Day (of the battle) of Badr by an arrow thrown by an
unknown person. She said, "O Allah's Apostle! You know the position of
Haritha in my heart (i.e. how dear to me he was), so if he is in Paradise, I will
not weep for him, or otherwise, you will see what I will do." The Prophet
said, "Are you mad? Is there only one Paradise? There are many Paradises,
and he is in the highest Paradise of Firdaus." The Prophet added, "A
forenoon journey or an after noon journey in Allah's Cause is better than the
whole world and whatever is in it; and a place equal to an arrow bow of
anyone of you, or a place equal to a foot in Paradise is better than the whole
world and whatever is in it; and if one of the women of Paradise looked at
the earth, she would fill the whole space between them (the earth and the
heaven) with light, and would fill whatever is in between them, with
perfume, and the veil of her face is better than the whole world and
whatever is in it."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 573:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "None will enter Paradise but will be shown the place he
would have occupied in the (Hell) Fire if he had rejected faith, so that he
may be more thankful; and none will enter the (Hell) Fire but will be shown
the place he would have occupied in Paradise if he had faith, so that may be
a cause of sorrow for him."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 574:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Who will be the luckiest person who will gain your
intercession on the Day of Resurrection?" The Prophet said, "O Abu Huraira!
I have thought that none will ask me about this Hadith before you, as I know
your longing for the (learning of) Hadiths. The luckiest person who will have
my intercession on the Day of Resurrection will be the one who said, 'None
has the right to be worshipped but Allah,' sincerely from the bottom of his
heart."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 575:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "I know the person who will be the last to come out of the
(Hell) Fire, and the last to enter Paradise. He will be a man who will come
out of the (Hell) Fire crawling, and Allah will say to him, 'Go and enter
Paradise.' He will go to it, but he will imagine that it had been filled, and then
he will return and say, 'O Lord, I have found it full.' Allah will say, 'Go and
enter Paradise, and you will have what equals the world and ten times as
much (or, you will have as much as ten times the like of the world).' On that,
the man will say, 'Do you mock at me (or laugh at me) though You are the
King?" I saw Allah's Apostle (while saying that) smiling that his premolar
teeth became visible. It is said that will be the lowest in degree amongst the
people of Paradise.

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 576:
Narrated 'Abbas:
that he said to the Prophet "Did you benefit Abu Talib with anything?"

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 577:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Some people said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall we see our Lord on the Day of
Resurrection?" He said, "Do you crowd and squeeze each other on looking
at the sun when it is not hidden by clouds?" They replied, "No, Allah's
Apostle." He said, "Do you crowd and squeeze each other on looking at the
moon when it is full and not hidden by clouds?" They replied, No, O Allah's
Apostle!" He said, "So you will see Him (your Lord) on the Day of
Resurrection similarly Allah will gather all the people and say, 'Whoever used
to worship anything should follow that thing. 'So, he who used to worship
the sun, will follow it, and he who used to worship the moon will follow it,
and he who used to worship false deities will follow them; and then only this
nation (i.e., Muslims) will remain, including their hypocrites. Allah will come
to them in a shape other than they know and will say, 'I am your Lord.' They
will say, 'We seek refuge with Allah from you. This is our place; (we will not
follow you) till our Lord comes to us, and when our Lord comes to us, we
will recognize Him.
Then Allah will come to then in a shape they know and will say, "I am your
Lord.' They will say, '(No doubt) You are our Lord,' and they will follow Him.
Then a bridge will be laid over the (Hell) Fire." Allah's Apostle added, "I will
be the first to cross it. And the invocation of the Apostles on that Day, will
be 'Allahukka Sallim, Sallim (O Allah, save us, save us!),' and over that bridge
there will be hooks Similar to the thorns of As Sa'dan (a thorny tree). Didn't
you see the thorns of As-Sa'dan?" The companions said, "Yes, O Allah's
Apostle." He added, "So the hooks over that bridge will be like the thorns of
As-Sa-dan except that their greatness in size is only known to Allah. These
hooks will snatch the people according to their deeds. Some people will be
ruined because of their evil deeds, and some will be cut into pieces and fall
down in Hell, but will be saved afterwards, when Allah has finished the
judgments among His slaves, and intends to take out of the Fire whoever He
wishes to take out from among those who used to testify that none had the
right to be worshipped but Allah.
We will order the angels to take them out and the angels will know them by
the mark of the traces of prostration (on their foreheads) for Allah banned
the f ire to consume the traces of prostration on the body of Adam's son. So
they will take them out, and by then they would have burnt (as coal), and
then water, called Maul Hayat (water of life) will be poured on them, and
they will spring out like a seed springs out on the bank of a rainwater
stream, and there will remain one man who will be facing the (Hell) Fire and
will say, 'O Lord! It's (Hell's) vapor has Poisoned and smoked me and its
flame has burnt me; please turn my face away from the Fire.' He will keep on
invoking Allah till Allah says, 'Perhaps, if I give you what you want), you will
ask for another thing?' The man will say, 'No, by Your Power, I will not ask
You for anything else.'
Then Allah will turn his face away from the Fire. The man will say after that,
'O Lord, bring me near the gate of Paradise.' Allah will say (to him), 'Didn't
you promise not to ask for anything else? Woe to you, O son of Adam ! How
treacherous you are!' The man will keep on invoking Allah till Allah will say,
'But if I give you that, you may ask me for something else.' The man will say,
'No, by Your Power. I will not ask for anything else.' He will give Allah his
covenant and promise not to ask for anything else after that. So Allah will
bring him near to the gate of Paradise, and when he sees what is in it, he will
remain silent as long as Allah will, and then he will say, 'O Lord! Let me enter
Paradise.' Allah will say, 'Didn't you promise that you would not ask Me for
anything other than that? Woe to you, O son of Adam ! How treacherous
you are!' On that, the man will say, 'O Lord! Do not make me the most
wretched of Your creation,' and will keep on invoking Allah till Allah will
smile and when Allah will smile because of him, then He will allow him to
enter Paradise, and when he will enter Paradise, he will be addressed, 'Wish
from so-and-so.' He will wish till all his wishes will be fulfilled, then Allah will
say, All this (i.e. what you have wished for) and as much again therewith are
for you.' "
Abu Huraira added: That man will be the last of the people of Paradise to
enter (Paradise).
Narrated 'Ata (while Abu Huraira was narrating): Abu Said was sitting in the
company of Abu Huraira and he did not deny anything of his narration till he
reached his saying: "All this and as much again therewith are for you." Then
Abu Sa'id said, "I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'This is for you and ten times
as much.' " Abu Huraira said, "In my memory it is 'as much again therewith.'
"

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 578:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "I am your predecessor at the Lake-Fount." 'Abdullah
added: The Prophet said, "I am your predecessor at the Lake-Fount, and
some of you will be brought in front of me till I will see them and then they
will be taken away from me and I will say, 'O Lord, my companions!' It will be
said, 'You do not know what they did after you had left.'

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 579:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "There will be a tank (Lake-Fount) in front of you as large
as the distance between Jarba and Adhruh (two towns in Sham)."
Volume 8, Book 76, Number 580:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The word 'Al-Kauthar' means the abundant good which Allah gave to him
(the Prophet Muhammad). Abu Bishr said: I said to Said, "Some people claim
that it (Al-Kauthar) is a river in Paradise." Said replied, "The river which is in
Paradise is one item of that good which Allah has bestowed upon him
(Muhammad)."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 581:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
The Prophet said, "My Lake-Fount is (so large that it takes) a month's
journey to cross it. Its water is whiter than milk, and its smell is nicer than
musk (a kind of Perfume), and its drinking cups are (as numerous) as the
(number of) stars of the sky; and whoever drinks from it, will never be
thirsty."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 582:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "The width of my Lake-Fount is equal to the distance
between Aila (a town in Sham) and Sana' (the capital of Yemen) and it has
as many (numerous) jugs as the number of stars of the sky."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 583:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said: "While I was walking in Paradise (on the night of Mi'raj), I
saw a river, on the two banks of which there were tents made of hollow
pearls. I asked, "What is this, O Gabriel?' He said, 'That is the Kauthar which
Your Lord has given to you.' Behold! Its scent or its mud was sharp smelling
musk!" (The sub-narrator, Hudba is in doubt as to the correct expression. )

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 584:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "Some of my companions will come to me at my Lake
Fount, and after I recognize them, they will then be taken away from me,
whereupon I will say, 'My companions!' Then it will be said, 'You do not
know what they innovated (new things) in the religion after you."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 585:
Narrated Abu Hazim from Sahl bin Sa'd:
The Prophet said, "I am your predecessor (forerunner) at the Lake-Fount,
and whoever will pass by there, he will drink from it and whoever will drink
from it, he will never be thirsty. There will come to me some people whom I
will recognize, and they will recognize me, but a barrier will be placed
between me and them." Abu Hazim added: An-Nu'man bin Abi 'Aiyash, on
hearing me, said. "Did you hear this from Sahl?" I said, "Yes." He said, " I
bear witness that I heard Abu Said Al-Khudri saying the same, adding that
the Prophet said: 'I will say: They are of me (i.e. my followers). It will be said,
'You do not know what they innovated (new things) in the religion after you
left'. I will say, 'Far removed, far removed (from mercy), those who changed
(their religion) after me." Abu Huraira narrated that the Prophet said, "On
the Day of Resurrection a group of companions will come to me, but will be
driven away from the Lake-Fount, and I will say, 'O Lord (those are) my
companions!' It will be said, 'You have no knowledge as to what they
innovated after you left; they turned apostate as renegades (reverted from
Islam)."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 586:
Narrated Ibn Al-Musaiyab:
The companions of the Prophet said, "Some men from my companions will
come to my Lake-Fount and they will be driven away from it, and I will say,
'O Lord, my companions!' It will be said, 'You have no knowledge of what
they innovated after you left: they turned apostate as renegades (reverted
from Islam).

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 587:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "While I was sleeping, a group (of my followers were
brought close to me), and when I recognized them, a man (an angel) came
out from amongst (us) me and them, he said (to them), 'Come along.' I
asked, 'Where?' He said, 'To the (Hell) Fire, by Allah' I asked, 'what is wrong
with them' He said, 'They turned apostate as renegades after you left.' Then
behold! (Another) group (of my followers) were brought close to me, and
when I recognized them, a man (an angel) came out from (me and them) he
said (to them); Come along.' I asked, "Where?' He said, 'To the (Hell) Fire, by
Allah.' I asked, What is wrong with them?' He said, 'They turned apostate as
renegades after you left. So I did not see anyone of them escaping except a
few who were like camels without a shepherd."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 588:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Between my house and my pulpit there is a garden
from amongst the gardens of Paradise, and my pulpit is over my LakeFount."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 589:
Narrated Jundab:
I heard the Prophet, saying, "I am your predecessor at the Lake-Fount. (AlKauthar) .

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 590:
Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir:
Once the Prophet went out and offered the funeral prayers for the martyrs
of Uhud, and then went to the pulpit and said, "I am a predecessor for you
and I am a witness for you: and by Allah, I am looking at my Fount just now,
and the keys of the treasures of the earth (or the keys of the earth) have
been given to me: and by Allah, I am not afraid that you will worship others
besides Allah after me, but I am afraid that you will strive and struggle
against each other over these treasures of the world."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 591:
Narrated Haritha bin Wahb:
I heard the Prophet mentioning the Lake-Fount (Al-Kauthar), saying, "(The
width of the Lake-Fount) is equal to the distance between Medina and Sana'
(capital of Yemen)." Haritha said that he heard the Prophet saying that his
Lake-Fount would be as large as the distance between Sana' and Medina. AlMustaurid said to Haritha, "Didn't you hear him talking about the vessels?"
He said, "No." Al-Mustaurid said, "The vessels are seen in it as (numberless
as) the stars."

Volume 8, Book 76, Number 592:
Narrated Asma 'bint Abu Bakr:
The Prophet said, "I will be standing at the Lake-Fount so that I will see
whom among you will come to me; and some people will be taken away
from me, and I will say, 'O Lord, (they are) from me and from my followers.'
Then it will be said, 'Did you notice what they did after you? By Allah, they
kept on turning on their heels (turned as renegades).' " The sub-narrator,
Ibn Abi Mulaika said, "O Allah, we seek refuge with You from turning on our
heels, or being put to trial in our religion."
BOOK 77. DIVINE WILL (AL-QADAR) (593-617)
Volume 8, Book 77, Number 593:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle, the truthful and truly-inspired, said, "Each one of you
collected in the womb of his mother for forty days, and then turns into a clot
for an equal period (of forty days) and turns into a piece of flesh for a similar
period (of forty days) and then Allah sends an angel and orders him to write
four things, i.e., his provision, his age, and whether he will be of the
wretched or the blessed (in the Hereafter). Then the soul is breathed into
him. And by Allah, a person among you (or a man) may do deeds of the
people of the Fire till there is only a cubit or an arm-breadth distance
between him and the Fire, but then that writing (which Allah has ordered
the angel to write) precedes, and he does the deeds of the people of
Paradise and enters it; and a man may do the deeds of the people of
Paradise till there is only a cubit or two between him and Paradise, and then
that writing precedes and he does the deeds of the people of the Fire and
enters it."

Volume 8, Book 77, Number 594:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "Allah puts an angel in charge of the uterus and the angel
says, 'O Lord, (it is) semen! O Lord, (it is now ) a clot! O Lord, (it is now) a
piece of flesh.' And then, if Allah wishes to complete its creation, the angel
asks, 'O Lord, (will it be) a male or a female? A wretched (an evil doer) or a
blessed (doer of good)? How much will his provisions be? What will his age
be?' So all that is written while the creature is still in the mother's womb."

Volume 8, Book 77, Number 595:
Narrated Imran bin Husain:
A man said, "O Allah's Apostle! Can the people of Paradise be known
(differentiated) from the people of the Fire; The Prophet replied, "Yes." The
man said, "Why do people (try to) do (good) deeds?" The Prophet said,
"Everyone will do the deeds for which he has been created to do or he will
do those deeds which will be made easy for him to do." (i.e. everybody will
find easy to do such deeds as will lead him to his destined place for which he
has been created).

Volume 8, Book 77, Number 596:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet ; was asked about the offspring of the pagans. He said, "Allah
knows what they would have done (were they to live)."

Volume 8, Book 77, Number 597:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle was asked about the offspring of the pagans. He said, "Allah
knows what they would have done (were they to live)."
Narrated Abu Huraira: Allah's Apostle said, "No child is born but has the
Islamic Faith, but its parents turn it into a Jew or a Christian. It is as you help
the animals give birth. Do you find among their offspring a mutilated one
before you mutilate them yourself?" The people said, "O Allah's Apostle!
What do you think about those (of them) who die young?" The Prophet said,
"Allah knows what they would have done (were they to live)."

Volume 8, Book 77, Number 598:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "No woman should ask for the divorce of her sister
(Muslim) so as to take her place, but she should marry the man (without
compelling him to divorce his other wife), for she will have nothing but what
Allah has written for her."

Volume 8, Book 77, Number 599:
Narrated Usama:
Once while I was with the Prophet and Sa'd, Ubai bin Ka'b and Mu'adh were
also sitting with him, there came to him a messenger from one of his
daughters, telling him that her child was on the verge of death. The Prophet
told the messenger to tell her, "It is for Allah what He takes, and it is for
Allah what He gives, and everything has its fixed time (limit). So (she should)
be patient and look for Allah's reward."

Volume 8, Book 77, Number 600:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
That while he was sitting with the Prophet a man from the Ansar came and
said, "O Allah's Apostle! We get slave girls from the war captives and we
love property; what do you think about coitus interruptus?" Allah's Apostle
said, "Do you do that? It is better for you not to do it, for there is no soul
which Allah has ordained to come into existence but will be created."

Volume 8, Book 77, Number 601:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
The Prophet once delivered a speech in front of us wherein he left nothing
but mentioned (about) everything that would happen till the Hour. Some of
us stored that our minds and some forgot it. (After that speech) I used to
see events taking place (which had been referred to in that speech) but I
had forgotten them (before their occurrence). Then I would recognize such
events as a man recognizes another man who has been absent and then
sees and recognizes him.
Volume 8, Book 77, Number 602:
Narrated 'Ali:
While we were sitting with the Prophet who had a stick with which he was
scraping the earth, he lowered his head and said, "There is none of you but
has his place assigned either in the Fire or in Paradise." Thereupon a man
from the people said, "Shall we not depend upon this, O Allah's Apostle?"
The Prophet said, "No, but carry on and do your deeds, for everybody finds
it easy to do such deeds (as will lead him to his place)." The Prophet then
recited the Verse: 'As for him who gives (in charity) and keeps his duty to
Allah..' (92.5)

Volume 8, Book 77, Number 603:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
We witnessed along with Allah's Apostle the Khaibar (campaign). Allah's
Apostle told his companions about a man who claimed to be a Muslim, "This
man is from the people of the Fire." When the battle started, the man
fought very bravely and received a great number of wounds and got
crippled. On that, a man from among the companions of the Prophet came
and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Do you know what the man you described as of
the people of the Fire has done? He has fought very bravely for Allah's Cause
and he has received many wounds." The Prophet said, "But he is indeed one
of the people of the Fire." Some of the Muslims were about to have some
doubt about that statement. So while the man was in that state, the pain
caused by the wounds troubled him so much that he put his hand into his
quiver and took out an arrow and committed suicide with it. Off went some
men from among the Muslims to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Allah has made your statement true. So-and-so has committed
suicide." Allah's Apostle said, "O Bilal! Get up and announce in public: None
will enter Paradise but a believer, and Allah may support this religion (Islam)
with a wicked man."
Volume 8, Book 77, Number 604:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:
There was a man who fought most bravely of all the Muslims on behalf of
the Muslims in a battle (Ghazwa) in the company of the Prophet. The
Prophet looked at him and said. "If anyone would like to see a man from the
people of the Fire, let him look at this (brave man)." On that, a man from the
People (Muslims) followed him, and he was in that state i.e., fighting fiercely
against the pagans till he was wounded, and then he hastened to end his life
by placing his sword between his breasts (and pressed it with great force)
till it came out between his shoulders. Then the man (who was watching
that person) went quickly to the Prophet and said, "I testify that you are
Allah's Apostle!" The Prophet asked him, "Why do you say that?" He said,
"You said about so-and-so, 'If anyone would like to see a man from the
people of the Fire, he should look at him.' He fought most bravely of all of us
on behalf of the Muslims and I knew that he would not die as a Muslim
(Martyr). So when he got wounded, he hastened to die and committed
suicide." There-upon the Prophet said, "A man may do the deeds of the
people of the Fire while in fact he is one of the people of Paradise, and he
may do the deeds of the people of Paradise while in fact he belongs to the
people of Fire, and verily, (the rewards of) the deeds are decided by the last
actions (deeds)".

Volume 8, Book 77, Number 605:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet forbade vowing and said, "In fact, vowing does not prevent
anything, but it makes a miser to spend his property."

Volume 8, Book 77, Number 606:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said (that Allah said), "Vowing does not bring to the son of
Adam anything I have not already written in his fate, but vowing is imposed
on him by way of fore ordainment. Through vowing I make a miser spend of
his wealth."

Volume 8, Book 77, Number 607:
Narrated Abu Musa:
While we were with Allah's Apostle in a holy battle, we never went up a hill
or reached its peak or went down a valley but raised our voices with Takbir.
Allah's Apostle came close to us and said, "O people! Don't exert yourselves,
for you do not call a deaf or an absent one, but you call the All-Listener, the
All-Seer." The Prophet then said, "O 'Abdullah bin Qais! Shall I teach you a
sentence which is from the treasures of Paradise? ( It is): 'La haula wala
quwata illa billah. (There is neither might nor power except with Allah)."

Volume 8, Book 77, Number 608:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
That the Prophet said, "No Caliph is appointed but has two groups of
advisors: One group advises him to do good and urges him to adopt it, and
the other group advises him to do bad and urges him to adopt it; and the
protected is the one whom Allah protects."

Volume 8, Book 77, Number 609:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
I did not see anything so resembling minor sins as what Abu Huraira said
from the Prophet, who said, "Allah has written for the son of Adam his
inevitable share of adultery whether he is aware of it or not: The adultery of
the eye is the looking (at something which is sinful to look at), and the
adultery of the tongue is to utter (what it is unlawful to utter), and the
innerself wishes and longs for (adultery) and the private parts turn that into
reality or refrain from submitting to the temptation."

Volume 8, Book 77, Number 610:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
(regarding the Verse) "And We granted the vision (Ascension to the heavens
"Miraj") which We showed you (O Muhammad as an actual eye witness) but
as a trial for mankind.' (17.60): Allah's Apostle actually saw with his own eyes
the vision (all the things which were shown to him) on the night of his Night
Journey to Jerusalem (and then to the heavens). The cursed tree which is
mentioned in the Qur'an is the tree of Az-Zaqqum.

Volume 8, Book 77, Number 611:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Adam and Moses argued with each other. Moses said to
Adam. 'O Adam! You are our father who disappointed us and turned us out
of Paradise.' Then Adam said to him, 'O Moses! Allah favored you with His
talk (talked to you directly) and He wrote (the Torah) for you with His Own
Hand. Do you blame me for action which Allah had written in my fate forty
years before my creation?' So Adam confuted Moses, Adam confuted
Moses," the Prophet added, repeating the Statement three times.

Volume 8, Book 77, Number 612:
Narrated Warrad:
(the freed slave of Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba) Muawiya wrote to Mughira.
'Write to me what you heard the Prophet saying after his prayer.' So AlMughira dictated to me and said, "I heard the Prophet saying after the
prayer, 'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah Alone Who has no
partner. O Allah! No-one can withhold what You give, and none can give
what You withhold, and the fortune of a man of means is useless before You
(i.e., only good deeds are of value)."

Volume 8, Book 77, Number 613:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Take refuge with Allah from the difficulties of severe
calamities, from having an evil end and a bad fate and from the malicious joy
of your enemies."

Volume 8, Book 77, Number 614:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
When taking an oath, the Prophet very often used to say, "No, by Him Who
turns the hearts."

Volume 8, Book 77, Number 615:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said to Ibn Saiyad, "I have kept for you a secret." Ibn Saiyad
said, "Ad-Dukh." The Prophet said, "Keep quiet, for you cannot go beyond
your limits (or you cannot exceed what has been foreordained for you)." On
that, 'Umar said (to the Prophet ), "Allow me to chop off his neck!" The
Prophet said, "Leave him, for if he is he (i.e., Ad-Dajjal), then you will not be
able to overcome him, and if he is not, then you gain no good by killing him."

Volume 8, Book 77, Number 616:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I asked Allah's Apostle about the plague. He said, "That was a means of
torture which Allah used to send upon whom-so-ever He wished, but He
made it a source of mercy for the believers, for anyone who is residing in a
town in which this disease is present, and remains there and does not leave
that town, but has patience and hopes for Allah's reward, and knows that
nothing will befall him except what Allah has written for him, then he will
get such reward as that of a martyr."

Volume 8, Book 77, Number 617:
Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib:
I saw the Prophet on the Day of (the battle of) Al-Khandaq, carrying earth
with us and saying, "By Allah, without Allah we would not have been guided,
neither would we have fasted, nor would we have prayed. O Allah! Send
down Sakina (calmness) upon us and make our feet firm when we meet (the
enemy). The pagans have rebelled against us, but if they want to put us in
affliction (i.e., fight us) we refuse (to flee)." (See Hadith No. 430, Vol. 5).
BOOK 78. OATHS AND VOWS (618-698)
Volume 8, Book 78, Number 618:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Abu Bakr As-Siddiq had never broken his oaths till Allah revealed the
expiation for the oaths. Then he said, "If I take an oath to do something and
later on I find something else better than the first one, then I do what is
better and make expiation for my oath."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 619:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Samura:
The Prophet said, "O 'Abdur-Rahman bin Samura! Do not seek to be a ruler,
because if you are given authority for it, then you will be held responsible for
it, but if you are given it without asking for it, then you will be helped in it
(by Allah): and whenever you take an oath to do something and later you
find that something else is better than the first, then do the better one and
make expiation for your oath."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 620:
Narrated Abu Musa:
I went to the Prophet along with a group of Al-Ash'ariyin in order to request
him to provide us with mounts. He said, "By Allah, I will not provide you with
mounts and I haven't got anything to mount you on." Then we stayed there
as long as Allah wished us to stay, and then three very nice looking shecamels were brought to him and he made us ride them. When we left, we,
or some of us, said, "By Allah, we will not be blessed, as we came to the
Prophet asking him for mounts, and he swore that he would not give us any
mounts but then he did give us. So let us go back to the Prophet and remind
him (of his oath)." When we returned to him (and reminded him of the fact),
he said, "I did not give you mounts, but it is Allah Who gave you. By Allah,
Allah willing, if I ever take an oath to do something and then I find
something else than the first, I will make expiation for my oath and do the
thing which is better (or do something which is better and give the expiation
for my oath)."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 621:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "We (Muslims) are the last in the world, but will be
foremost on the Day of Resurrection." Allah's Apostle also said, "By Allah, if
anyone of you insists on fulfilling an oath by which he may harm his family,
he commits a greater sin in Allah's sight than that of dissolving his oath and
making expiation for it."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 622:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Anyone who takes an oath through which his family
may be harmed, and insists on keeping it, he surely commits a sin greater
(than that of dissolving his oath). He should rather compensate for that oath
by making expiation."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 623:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle sent an army detachment and made Usama bin Zaid its
commander. Some people criticized (spoke badly of) Usama's leadership. So
Allah's Apostle got up saying, "If you people are criticizing Usama's
leadership, you have already criticized the leadership of his father before.
But Wa-aimullah (i.e., By Allah), he (i.e. Zaid) deserved the leadership, and he
was one of the most beloved persons to me; and now this (his son Usama) is
one of the dearest persons to me after him." (See Hadith No. 745, Vol. 5)

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 624:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The oath of the Prophet used to be: "No, by Him who turns the hearts."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 625:
Narrated Jabir bin Samura:
The Prophet said, "If Caesar is ruined, there will be no Caesar after him; and
if Khosrau is ruined, there will be no Khosrau, after him; and, by Him in
Whose Hand my soul is, surely you will spend their treasures in Allah's
Cause."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 626:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If Khosrau is ruined, there will be no Khosrau after him;
and if Caesar is ruined, there will be no Caesar after him. By Him in Whose
Hand Muhammad's soul is, surely you will spend their treasures in Allah's
Cause."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 627:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "O followers of Muhammad! By Allah, if you knew what I
know, you would weep much and laugh little."
Volume 8, Book 78, Number 628:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Hisham:
We were with the Prophet and he was holding the hand of 'Umar bin AlKhattab. 'Umar said to Him, "O Allah's Apostle! You are dearer to me than
everything except my own self." The Prophet said, "No, by Him in Whose
Hand my soul is, (you will not have complete faith) till I am dearer to you
than your own self." Then 'Umar said to him, "However, now, by Allah, you
are dearer to me than my own self." The Prophet said, "Now, O 'Umar, (now
you are a believer)."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 629:
Narrated Abu Huraira and Zaid bin Khalid:
Two men had a dispute in the presence of Allah's Apostle. One of them said,
"O Allah's Apostle! Judge between us according to Allah's Laws." The other
who was wiser, said, "Yes, O Allah's Apostle! Judge between us according to
Allah's Laws and allow me to speak. The Prophet said, "Speak." He said, "My
son was a laborer serving this (person) and he committed illegal sexual
intercourse with his wife, The people said that my son is to be stoned to
death, but I ransomed him with one-hundred sheep and a slave girl. Then I
asked the learned people, who informed me that my son should receive one
hundred lashes and will be exiled for one year, and stoning will be the lot for
the man's wife." Allah's Apostle said, "Indeed, by Him in Whose Hand my
soul is, I will judge between you according to Allah's Laws: As for your sheep
and slave girl, they are to be returned to you." Then he scourged his son one
hundred lashes and exiled him for one year. Then Unais Al-Aslami was
ordered to go to the wife of the second man, and if she confessed (the
crime), then stone her to death. She did confess, so he stoned her to death.

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 630:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
The Prophet said, "Do you think if the tribes of Aslam, Ghifar, Muzaina and
Juhaina are better than the tribes of Tamim, 'Amir bin Sa'sa'a, Ghatfan and
Asad, they (the second group) are despairing and losing?" They (the
Prophet's companions) said, "Yes, (they are)." He said, "By Him in Whose
Hand my soul is, they (the first group) are better than them (the second
group)."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 631:
Narrated Abu Humaid As-Sa'idi:
Allah's Apostle employed an employee (to collect Zakat). The employee
returned after completing his job and said, "O Allah's Apostle! This (amount
of Zakat) is for you, and this (other amount) was given to me as a present."
The Prophet said to him, "Why didn't you stay at your father's or mother's
house and see if you would be given presents or not?" Then Allah's Apostle
got up in the evening after the prayer, and having testified that none has the
right to be worshipped but Allah and praised and glorified Allah as He
deserved, he said, "Now then ! What about an employee whom we employ
and then he comes and says, 'This amount (of Zakat) is for you, and this
(amount) was given to me as a present'? Why didn't he stay at the house of
his father and mother to see if he would be given presents or not? By Him in
Whose Hand Muhammad's soul is, none of you will steal anything of it (i.e.
Zakat) but will bring it by carrying it over his neck on the Day of
Resurrection. If it has been a camel, he will bring it (over his neck) while it
will be grunting, and if it has been a cow, he will bring it (over his neck),
while it will be mooing; and if it has been a sheep, he will bring it (over his
neck) while it will be bleeding." The Prophet added, "I have preached you
(Allah's Message)." Abu Humaid said, "Then Allah's Apostle raised his hands
so high that we saw the whiteness of his armpits."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 632:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Abu-l-Qasim (the Prophet) said, "By Him in Whose Hand Muhammad's soul
is, if you know that which I know, you would weep much and laugh little."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 633:
Narrated Abu Dhar:
I reached him (the Prophet ) while in the shade of the Ka'ba; he was saying,
"They are the losers, by the Lord of the Ka'ba! They are the losers, by the
Lord of the Ka'ba!" I said (to myself ), "What is wrong with me? Is anything
improper detected in me? What is wrong with me? Then I sat beside him and
he kept on saying his statement. I could not remain quiet, and Allah knows in
what sorrowful state I was at that time. So I said, ' Who are they (the
losers)? Let My father and mother be sacrificed for you, O Allah's Apostle!"
He said, "They are the wealthy people, except the one who does like this
and like this and like this (i.e., spends of his wealth in Allah's Cause)."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 634:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "(The Prophet) Solomon once said, 'Tonight I will sleep
with ninety women, each of whom will bring forth a (would-be) cavalier who
will fight in Allah's Cause." On this, his companion said to him, "Say: Allah
willing!" But he did not say Allah willing. Solomon then slept with all the
women, but none of them became pregnant but one woman who later
delivered a half-man. By Him in Whose Hand Muhammad's soul is, if he
(Solomon) had said, 'Allah willing' (all his wives would have brought forth
boys) and they would have fought in Allah's Cause as cavaliers. "

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 635:
Narrated Al-Bara 'bin 'Azib:
A piece of silken cloth was given to the Prophet as a present and the people
handed it over amongst themselves and were astonished at its beauty and
softness. Allah's Apostle said, "Are you astonished at it?" They said, "Yes, O
Allah's Apostle!" He said, "By Him in Whose Hand my soul is, the
handkerchiefs of Sa'd in Paradise are better than it."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 636:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Hind bint 'Utba bin Rabi 'a said, "O Allah 's Apostle! (Before I embraced
Islam), there was no family on the surface of the earth, I wish to have
degraded more than I did your family. But today there is no family whom I
wish to have honored more than I did yours." Allah's Apostle said, "I
thought similarly, by Him in Whose Hand Muhammad's soul is!" Hind said,
"O Allah's Apostle! (My husband) Abu Sufyan is a miser. Is it sinful of me to
feed my children from his property?" The Prophet said, "No, unless you take
it for your needs what is just and reasonable."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 637:
Narrated Abdullah bin Masud:
While Allah's Apostle was sitting, reclining his back against a Yemenite
leather tent he said to his companions, "Will you be pleased to be onefourth of the people of Paradise?" They said, 'Yes.' He said "Won't you be
pleased to be one-third of the people of Paradise" They said, "Yes." He said,
"By Him in Whose Hand Muhammad's soul is, I hope that you will be onehalf of the people of Paradise."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 638:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
A man heard another man reciting: Surat-ul-Ikhlas (The Unity) 'Say: He is
Allah, the One (112) and he was repeating it. The next morning he came to
Allah's Apostle and mentioned the whole story to him as if he regarded the
recitation of that Sura as insufficient On that, Allah's Apostle said, "By Him in
Whose Hand my soul is! That (Sura No. 112) equals one-third of the Qur'an."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 639:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Perform the bowing and the prostration
properly (with peace of mind), for, by Him in Whose Hand my soul is, I see
you from behind my back when you bow and when you prostrate."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 640:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
An Ansari woman came to the Prophet in the company of her children, and
the Prophet said to her, "By Him in Whose Hand my soul is, you are the most
beloved people to me!" And he repeated the statement thrice.

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 641:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle met 'Umar bin Al-Khattab while the latter was going with a
group of camel-riders, and he was swearing by his father. The Prophet said,
"Lo! Allah forbids you to swear by your fathers, so whoever has to take an
oath, he should swear by Allah or keep quiet."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 643:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Do not swear by your fathers."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 644:
Narrated Zahdam:
There was a relation of love and brotherhood between this tribe of Jarm
and Al-Ash'ariyin. Once we were with Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari, and then a meal
containing chicken was brought to Abu Musa, and there was present, a man
from the tribe of Taimillah who was of red complexion as if he were from
non-Arab freed slaves. Abu Musa invited him to the meal. He said, "I have
seen chickens eating dirty things, so I deemed it filthy and took an oath that
I would never eat chicken." On that, Abu Musa said, "Get up, I will narrate to
you about that. Once a group of the Ash'ariyin and I went to Allah's Apostle
and asked him to provide us with mounts; he said, 'By Allah, I will never give
you any mounts nor do I have anything to mount you on.' Then a few camels
of war booty were brought to Allah's Apostle , and he asked about us,
saying, 'Where are the Ash-'ariyin?' He then ordered five nice camels to be
given to us, and when we had departed, we said, 'What have we done?
Allah's Apostle had taken the oath not to give us any mounts, and that he
had nothing to mount us on, and later he gave us that we might ride? Did we
take advantage of the fact that Allah's Apostle had forgotten his oath? By
Allah, we will never succeed.' So we went back to him and said to him, 'We
came to you to give us mounts, and you took an oath that you would not
give us any mounts and that you had nothing to mount us on.' On that he
said, 'I did not provide you with mounts, but Allah did. By Allah, if I take an
oath to do something, and then find something else better than it, I do that
which is better and make expiation for the dissolution of the oath.' "

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 645:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Whoever swears saying in his oath. 'By Al-Lat and
Al'Uzza,' should say, 'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah; and
whoever says to his friend, 'Come, let me gamble with you,' should give
something in charity."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 646:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle had a gold ring made for himself, and he used to wear it with
the stone towards the inner part of his hand. Consequently, the people had
similar rings made for themselves. Afterwards the Prophet; sat on the pulpit
and took it off, saying, "I used to wear this ring and keep its stone towards
the palm of my hand." He then threw it away and said, "By Allah, I will never
wear it." Therefore all the people threw away their rings as well.

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 647:
Narrated Thabit bin Ad-Dahhak:
The Prophet said, "Whoever swears by a religion other than Islam, is, as he
says; and whoever commits suicide with something, will be punished with
the same thing in the (Hell) Fire; and cursing a believer is like murdering him;
and whoever accuses a believer of disbelief, then it is as if he had killed him."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 648:
Narrated Al-Bara:
The Prophet ordered us to help others to fulfill the oaths.

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 649:
Narrated Usama:
Once a daughter of Allah's Apostle sent a message to Allah's Apostle while
Usama, Sa'd, and my father or Ubai were (sitting there) with him. She said,
(in the message); My child is going to die; please come to us." Allah's
Apostle returned the messenger and told him to convey his greetings to her,
and say, "Whatever Allah takes, is for Him and whatever He gives is for Him,
and everything with Him has a limited fixed term (in this world): so she
should be patient and hope for Allah's reward." Then she again sent for him
swearing that he should come; so The Prophet got up, and so did we. When
he sat there (at the house of his daughter), the child was brought to him,
and he took him into his lap while the child's breath was disturbed in his
chest. The eyes of Allah's Apostle started shedding tears. Sa'd said, "What is
this, O Allah's Apostle?" The Prophet said, "This is the mercy which Allah has
lodged in the hearts of whoever He wants of His slaves, and verily Allah is
merciful only to those of His slaves who are merciful (to others).'

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 650:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Any Muslim who has lost three of his children will not
be touched by the Fire except that which will render Allah's oath fulfilled."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 651:
Narrated Haritha bin Wahb:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Shall I tell you of the people of Paradise? They
comprise every poor humble person, and if he swears by Allah to do
something, Allah will fulfill it; while the people of the fire comprise every
violent, cruel arrogant person."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 652:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet was asked, "Who are the best people?" He replied: The people
of my generation, and then those who will follow (come after) them, and
then those who will come after the later; after that there will come some
people whose witness will precede their oaths and their oaths will go ahead
of their witness." Ibrahim (a sub-narrator) said, "When we were young, our
elder friends used to prohibit us from taking oaths by saying, 'I bear witness
swearing by Allah, or by Allah's Covenant."'

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 653:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "Whoever swears falsely in order to grab the property of a
Muslim (or of his brother), Allah will be angry with him when he meets Him."
Allah then revealed in confirmation of the above statement:--'Verily those
who purchase a small gain at the cost of Allah's Covenant and their own
oaths.' (3.77) Al-Ash'ath said, "This Verse was revealed regarding me and a
companion of mine when we had a dispute about a well."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 654:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "The Hell Fire will keep on saying: 'Are there anymore
(people to come)?' Till the Lord of Power and Honor will put His Foot over it
and then it will say, 'Qat! Qat! (sufficient! sufficient!) by Your Power and
Honor. And its various sides will come close to each other (i.e., it will
contract). "

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 655:
Narrated Az-Zuhri:
I heard 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair, Said bin Al-Musaiyab, 'Alqama bin Waqqas and
'Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah narrating from 'Aisha, the wife of the Prophet, the
story about the liars who said what they said about her and how Allah
revealed her innocence afterwards. Each one of the above four narrators
narrated to me a portion of her narration. (It was said in it), "The Prophet
stood up, saying, 'Is there anyone who can relieve me from 'Abdullah bin
Ubai?' On that, Usaid bin Hudair got up and said to Sa'd bin 'Ubada,
La'amrullahi (By the Eternity of Allah), we will kill him!' "

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 656:
Narrated 'Aisha:
regarding: 'Allah will not call you to account for that which is unintentional
in your oaths...' (2.225) This Verse was revealed concerning such oath
formulas as: 'No, by Allah!' and 'Yes, by Allah!' something against his oath
due to forgetfulness should he make expiation?). And the Statement of
Allah: 'And there is no blame on you if you make a mistake therein.' (33.5)
And Allah said:-- '(Moses said to Khadir): Call me not to account for what I
forgot.' (18.73)

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 657:
Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet said, "Allah forgives my followers those
(evil deeds) the

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 658:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-As:
While the Prophet was delivering a sermon on the Day of Nahr (i.e., 10th
Dhul-Hijja-Day of slaughtering the sacrifice), a man got up saying, "I thought,
O Allah's Apostle, such-and-such a thing was to be done before such-andsuch a thing." Another man got up, saying, "O Allah's Apostle! As regards
these three (acts of Hajj), thought so-and-so." The Prophet said, "Do, and
there is no harm," concerning all those matters on that day. And so, on that
day, whatever question he was asked, he said, "Do it, do it, and there is no
harm therein."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 659:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
A man said to the Prophet (while he was delivering a sermon on the Day of
Nahr), "I have performed the Tawaf round the Ka'ba before the Rami
(throwing pebbles) at the Jamra." The Prophet said, "There is no harm
(therein)." Another man said, "I had my head shaved before slaughtering
(the sacrifice)." The Prophet said, "There is no harm." A third said, "I have
slaughtered (the sacrifice) before the Rami (throwing pebbles) at the
Jamra." The Prophet said, "There is no harm."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 660:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man entered the mosque and started praying while Allah's Apostle was
sitting somewhere in the mosque. Then (after finishing the prayer) the man
came to the Prophet and greeted him. The Prophet said to him, "Go back
and pray, for you have not prayed. The man went back, and having prayed,
he came and greeted the Prophet. The Prophet after returning his greetings
said, "Go back and pray, for you did not pray." On the third time the man
said, "(O Allah's Apostle!) teach me (how to pray)." The Prophet said,
"When you get up for the prayer, perform the ablution properly and then
face the Qibla and say Takbir (Allahu Akbar), and then recite of what you
know of the Quran, and then bow, and remain in this state till you feel at
rest in bowing, and then raise your head and stand straight; and then
prostrate till you feel at rest in prostration, and then sit up till you feel at rest
while sitting; and then prostrate again till you feel at rest in prostration; and
then get up and stand straight, and do all this in all your prayers."
Volume 8, Book 78, Number 661:
Narrated 'Aisha:
When the pagans were defeated during the (first stage) of the battle of
Uhud, Satan shouted, "O Allah's slaves! Beware of what is behind you!" So
the front files of the Muslims attacked their own back files. Hudhaifa bin AlYaman looked and on seeing his father he shouted: "My father! My father!"
By Allah! The people did not stop till they killed his father. Hudhaifa then
said, "May Allah forgive you." 'Urwa (the sub-narrator) added, "Hudhaifa
continued asking Allah forgiveness for the killers of his father till he met
Allah (till he died)."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 662:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "If somebody eats something forgetfully while he is
fasting, then he should complete his fast, for Allah has made him eat and
drink."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 663:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Buhaina:
Once Allah's Apostle led us in prayer, and after finishing the first two Rakat,
got up (instead of sitting for At-Tahiyyat) and then carried on with the
prayer. When he had finished his prayer, the people were waiting for him to
say Taslim, but before saying Tasiim, he said Takbir and prostrated; then he
raised his head, and saying Takbir, he prostrated (SAHU) and then raised his
head and finished his prayer with Taslim.

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 664:
Narrated Ibn Mas'ud:
that Allah's Prophet led them in the Zuhr prayer and he offered either more
or less Rakat, and it was said to him, "O Allah's Apostle ! Has the prayer been
reduced, or have you forgotten?" He asked, "What is that?" They said, "You
have prayed so many Rak'at." So he performed with them two more
prostrations and said, "These two prostrations are to be performed by the
person who does not know whether he has prayed more or less (Rakat) in
which case he should seek to follow what is right. And then complete the
rest (of the prayer) and perform two extra prostrations."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 665:
Narrated Ubai bin Ka'b:
that he heard Allah's Apostle saying, "(Moses) said, 'Call me not to account
for what I forget and be not hard upon me for my affair (with you)' (18.73)
the first excuse of Moses was his forgetfulness."
Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib that once he had a guest, so he told his family (on
the Day of Id-ul-Adha) that they should slaughter the animal for sacrifice
before he returned from the ('Id) prayer in order that their guest could take
his meal. So his family slaughtered (the animal ) before the prayer. Then
they mentioned that event to the Prophet who ordered Al-Bara to slaughter
another sacrifice. Al-Bara' said to the Prophet , "I have a young milch shegoat which is better than two sheep for slaughtering." (The sub-narrator,
Ibn 'Aun used to say, "I don't know whether the permission (to slaughter a
she-goat as a sacrifice) was especially given to Al-Bara' or if it was in general
for all the Muslims.") (See Hadith No. 99, Vol. 2.)

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 666:
Narrated Jundub:
I witnessed the Prophet offering the 'Id prayer (and after finishing it) he
delivered a sermon and said, "Whoever has slaughtered his sacrifice (before
the prayer) should make up for it (i.e. slaughter another animal) and
whoever has not slaughtered his sacrifice yet, should slaughter it by
mentioning Allah's Name over it."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 667:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
The Prophet said, "The biggest sins are: To join others in worship with Allah;
to be undutiful to one's parents; to kill somebody unlawfully; and to take an
oath Al-Ghamus.

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 668:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "If somebody is ordered (by the ruler or the judge) to
take an oath, and he takes a false oath in order to grab the property of a
Muslim, then he will incur Allah's Wrath when he will meet Him." And Allah
revealed in its confirmation: 'Verily! Those who purchase a small gain at the
cost of Allah's covenants and their own oaths.' (3.77) (The sub-narrator
added:) Al-Ash'ath bin Qais entered, saying, "What did Abu 'Abdur-Rahman
narrate to you?" They said, "So-and-so," Al-Ash'ath said, "This verse was
revealed in my connection. I had a well on the land of my cousin (and we
had a dispute about it). I reported him to Allah 's Apostle who said (to me).
"You should give evidence (i.e. witness) otherwise the oath of your
opponent will render your claim invalid." I said, "Then he (my opponent) will
take the oath, O Allah's Apostle." Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever is ordered
(by the ruler or the judge) to give an oath, and he takes a false oath in order
to grab the property of a Muslim, then he will incur Allah's Wrath when he
meets Him on the Day of Resurrection."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 669:
Narrated Abu Musa:
My companions sent me to the Prophet to ask him for some mounts. He
said, "By Allah! I will not mount you on anything!" When I met him, he was in
an angry mood, but when I met him (again), he said, "Tell your companions
that Allah or Allah's Apostle will provide you with mounts."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 670:
Narrated Az-Zuhri:
I heard 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair, Said bin Al-Musaiyab, 'Alqama bin Waqqas and
'Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah bin 'Uqba relating from 'Aisha, the wife of the
Prophet the narration of the people (i.e. the liars) who spread the slander
against her and they said what they said, and how Allah revealed her
innocence. Each of them related to me a portion of that narration. (They
said that 'Aisha said), ''Then Allah revealed the ten Verses starting with:-'Verily! Those who spread the slander..' (24.11-21)
All these verses were in proof of my innocence. Abu Bakr As-Siddiq who
used to provide for Mistah some financial aid because of his relation to him,
said, "By Allah, I will never give anything (in charity) to Mistah, after what he
has said about 'Aisha" Then Allah revealed:-- 'And let not those among you
who are good and are wealthy swear not to give (any sort of help) to their
kins men....' (24.22) On that, Abu Bakr said, "Yes, by Allah, I like that Allah
should forgive me." and then resumed giving Mistah the aid he used to give
him and said, "By Allah! I will never withhold it from him."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 671:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari:
I went along with some men from the Ash-ariyin to Allah's Apostle and it
happened that I met him while he was in an angry mood. We asked him to
provide us with mounts, but he swore that he would not give us any. Later
on he said, "By Allah, Allah willing, if ever I take an oath (to do something)
and later on I find something else better than the first, then I do the better
one and give expiation for the dissolution of my oath."
Volume 8, Book 78, Number 672:
Narrated Al-Musaiyab:
When the death of Abu Talib approached, Allah's Apostle came to him and
said, "Say: La ilaha illallah, a word with which I will be able to defend you
before Allah."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 673:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "(Following are) two words (sentences or utterances
that are very easy for the tongue to say, and very heavy in the balance (of
reward,) and the must beloved to the Gracious Almighty (And they are):
Subhan Allah wa bi-hamdihi; Subhan Allahi-l-'Azim,"

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 674:
Narrated 'Abdullah: Allah's Apostle said a sentence and I said another. He
said, "Whoever dies while he is setting up rivals along with Allah (i.e.
worshipping others along with Allah) shall be admitted into the (Hell) Fire."
And I said the other: "W

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 675:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle took an oath for abstention from h is wives (for one month),
and during those days he had a sprain in his foot. He stayed in a Mashrubah
(an upper room) for twenty-nine nights and then came down. Then the
people said, "O Allah's Apostle! You took an oath for abstention (from your
wives) for one month." On that he said, A month can be of twenty-nine days
'
Volume 8, Book 78, Number 676:
Narrated Abu Hazim:
Sahl bin Sa'd said, "Abu Usaid, the companion of the Prophet, got married,
so he invited the Prophet to his wedding party, and the bride herself served
them. Sahl said to the People, 'Do you know what drink she served him
with? She infused some dates in a pot at night and the next morning she
served him with the infusion."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 677:
Narrated Sauda:
(the wife of the Prophet) One of our sheep died and we tanned its skin and
kept on infusing dates in it till it was a worn out water skin.

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 678:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The family of (the Prophet) Muhammad never ate wheat-bread with meat
for three consecutive days to their fill, till he met Allah.

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 679:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Abu Talha said to Um Sulaim, "I heard the voice of Allah's Apostle rather
weak, and I knew that it was because of hunger. Have you anything (to
present to the Prophet)?" She said, "Yes." Then she took out a few loaves of
barley bread and took a veil of hers and wrapped the bread with a part of it
and sent me to Allah's Apostle. I went and found Allah's Apostle sitting in
the mosque with some people. I stood up before him. Allah's Apostle said to
me, "Has Abu Talha sent you?" I said, ' Yes. Then Allah's Apostle said t
those who were with him. "Get up and proceed." I went ahead of them (as
their forerunner) and came to Abu Talha and informed him about it. Abu
Talha said, "O Um Sulaim! Allah's Apostle has come and we have no food to
feed them." Um Sulaim said, "Allah and His Apostle know best." So Abu
Talha went out (to receive them) till he met Allah's Apostle.
Allah's Apostle came in company with Abu Talha and they entered the
house. Allah's Apostle said, "O Um Sulaim! Bring whatever you have." So she
brought that (barley) bread and Allah's Apostle ordered that bread to be
broken into small pieces, and then Um Sulaim poured over it some butter
from a leather butter container, and then Allah's Apostle said what Allah
wanted him to say, (i.e. blessing the food). Allah's Apostle then said, "Admit
ten men." Abu Talha admitted them and they ate to their fill and went out.
He again said, "Admit ten men." He admitted them, and in this way all the
people ate to their fill, and they were seventy or eighty men."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 680:
Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "The (reward of) deeds, depend upon the
intentions and every person will get the reward according to what he has
intended. So whoever emigrated for the sake of Allah and His Apostle, then
his emigration will be considered to be for Allah and His Apostle, and
whoever emigrated for the sake of worldly gain or for a woman to marry,
then his emigration will be considered to be for what he emigrated for."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 681:
Narrated Ka'b bin Malik:
In the last part of his narration about the three who remained behind (from
the battle of Tabuk). (I said) "As a proof of my true repentance (for not
joining the Holy battle of Tabuk), I shall give up all my property for the sake
of Allah and His Apostle (as an expiation for that sin)." The Prophet said (to
me), "Keep some of your wealth, for that is better for you."
Volume 8, Book 78, Number 682:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to stay (for a period) in the house of Zainab bint Jahsh
(one of the wives of the Prophet ) and he used to drink honey in her house.
Hafsa and I decided that when the Prophet entered upon either of us, she
would say, "I smell in you the bad smell of Maghafir (a bad smelling raisin).
Have you eaten Maghafir?" When he entered upon one of us, she said that
to him. He replied (to her), "No, but I have drunk honey in the house of
Zainab bint Jahsh, and I will never drink it again." Then the following verse
was revealed: 'O Prophet ! Why do you ban (for you) that which Allah has
made lawful for you?. ..(up to) If you two (wives of the Prophet turn in
repentance to Allah.' (66.1-4) The two were 'Aisha and Hafsa And also the
Statement of Allah: 'And (Remember) when the Prophet disclosed a matter
in confidence to one of his wives!' (66.3) i.e., his saying, "But I have drunk
honey." Hisham said: It also meant his saying, "I will not drink anymore, and I
have taken an oath, so do not inform anybody of that '

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 683:
Narrated Sa'id bin Al-Harith:
that he heard Ibn 'Umar saying, "Weren't people forbidden to make vows?"
The Prophet said, 'A vow neither hastens nor delays anything, but by the
making of vows, some of the wealth of a miser is taken out."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 684:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
The Prophet forbade the making of vows and said, "It (a vow) does not
prevent anything (that has to take place), but the property of a miser is
spent (taken out) with it."
Volume 8, Book 78, Number 685:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah says, 'The vow, does not bring about for the son of
Adam anything I have not decreed for him, but his vow may coincide with
what has been decided for him, and by this way I cause a miser to spend of
his wealth. So he gives Me (spends in charity) for the fulfillment of what has
been decreed for him what he would not give Me before but for his vow."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 686:
Narrated Zahdam bin Mudarrab:
'Imran bin Hussain said, "The Prophet said, 'The best of you (people) are my
generation, and the second best will be those who will follow them, and
then those who will follow the second generation." Imran added, "I do not
remember whether he mentioned two or three (generations) after his
generation. He added, 'Then will come some people who will make vows but
will not fulfill them; and they will be dishonest and will not be trustworthy,
and they will give their witness without being asked to give their witness,
and fatness will appear among them.' "

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 687:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "Whoever vows that he will be obedient to Allah, should
remain obedient to Him; and whoever made a vow that he will disobey
Allah, should not disobey Him."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 688:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
'Umar said "O Allah's Apostle! I vowed to perform I'tikaf for one night in AlMasjid-al-Haram, during the Pre-Islamic Period of ignorance (before
embracing Islam). "The Prophet said, "Fulfill your vow." Ibn 'Umar said to
the lady, "Pray on her behalf." Ibn 'Abbas said the same.

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 689:
Narrated Sa'id bin 'Ubada Al-Ansari:
that he consulted the Prophet about a vow that had been made by his
mother who died without fulfilling it. The Prophet gave his verdict that he
should fulfill it on her behalf. The verdict became Sunna (i.e. the Prophet's
tradition).

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 690:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
A man came to the Prophet and said to him, "My sister vowed to perform
the Hajj, but she died (before fulfilling it)." The Prophet said, "Would you not
have paid her debts if she had any?" The man said, "Yes." The Prophet said,
"So pay Allah's Rights, as He is more entitled to receive His rights."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 691:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "Whoever vowed to be obedient to Allah, must be
obedient to Him; and whoever vowed to be disobedient to Allah, should not
be disobedient to Him."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 692:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "Allah is not in need of this man) torturing himself," when
he saw the man walking between his two sons (who were supporting him).

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 693:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet saw a man performing Tawaf around the Ka'ba, tied with a
rope or something else (while another person was holding him). The
Prophet cut that rope off.

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 694:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
While performing the Tawaf around the Ka'ba, the Prophet passed by a
person leading another person by a hair-rope nose-ring in his nose. The
Prophet cut the hair-rope nose-ring off with his hand and ordered the man
to lead him by the hand.

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 695:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
While the Prophet was delivering a sermon, he saw a man standing, so he
asked about that man. They (the people) said, "It is Abu Israil who has
vowed that he will stand and never sit down, and he will never come in the
shade, nor speak to anybody, and will fast.'' The Prophet said, "Order him to
speak and let him come in the shade, and make him sit down, but let him
complete his fast."

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 696:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
that he was asked about a man who had vowed that he would fast all the
days of his life then the day of 'Id al Adha or 'Id-al-Fitr came. 'Abdullah bin
'Umar said: You have indeed a good example in Allah's Apostle. He did not
fast on the day of 'Id al Adha or the day of 'Id-al-Fitr, and we do not intend
fasting on these two days.

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 697:
Narrated Ziyad bin Jubair:
I was with Ibn 'Umar when a man asked him, "I have vowed to fast every
Tuesday or Wednesday throughout my life and if the day of my fasting
coincided with the day of Nahr (the first day of 'Id-al-Adha), (What shall I
do?)" Ibn 'Umar said, "Allah has ordered the vows to be fulfilled, and we are
forbidden to fast on the day of Nahr." The man repeated his question and
Ibn 'Umar repeated his former answer, adding nothing more.

Volume 8, Book 78, Number 698:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
We went out in the company of Allah's Apostle on the day of (the battle of)
Khaibar, and we did not get any gold or silver as war booty, but we got
property in the form of things and clothes. Then a man called Rifa'a bin Zaid,
from the tribe of Bani Ad-Dubaib, presented a slave named Mid'am to Allah's
Apostle. Allah's Apostle headed towards the valley of Al-Qura, and when he
was in the valley of Al-Qura an arrow was thrown by an unidentified person,
struck and killed Mid'am who was making a she-camel of Allah's Apostle
kneel down. The people said, "Congratulations to him (the slave) for gaining
Paradise." Allah's Apostle said, "No! By Him in Whose Hand my soul is, for
the sheet which he stole from the war booty before its distribution on the
day of Khaibar, is now burning over him." When the people heard that, a
man brought one or two Shiraks (leather straps of shoes) to the Prophet.
The Prophet said, "A Shirak of fire, or two Shiraks of fire."


BOOK 79. EXPIATION FOR UNFULFILLED OATHS (699-715)
Volume 8, Book 79, Number 699:
Narrated Ka'b bin 'Ujra:
I came to the Prophet and he said to me, "Come near." So I went near to
him and he said, "Are your lice troubling you?" I replied, "Yes." He said,
"(Shave your head and) make expiation in the form of fasting, Sadaqa
(giving in charity), or offering a sacrifice." (The sub-narrator) Aiyub said,
"Fasting should be for three days, and the Nusuk (sacrifice) is to be a sheep,
and the Sadaqa is to be given to six poor persons."

Volume 8, Book 79, Number 700:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man came to the Prophet and said, "I am ruined!" The Prophet said, "What
is the matter with you?" He said, "I had sexual relation with my wife (while I
was fasting) in Ramadan." The Prophet said, "Have you got enough to
manumit a slave?" He said, "No." The Prophet said, "Can you fast for two
successive months?" The man said, "No." The Prophet said, "Can you feed
sixty poor persons?" The man said, "No." Then the Prophet said to him, "Sit
down," and he sat down. Afterwards an 'Irq, i.e., a big basket containing
dates was brought to the Prophet and the Prophet said to him, "Take this
and give it in charity." The man said, "To poorer people than we?" On that,
the Prophet smiled till his premolar teeth became visible, and then told him,
"Feed your family with it." (See Hadith No. 157, Vol 3)

Volume 8, Book 79, Number 701:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man came to Allah's Apostle and said, "I am ruined!" The Prophet said to
him, "What is the matter?" He said, "I have done a sexual relation with my
wife (while fasting) in Ramadan." The Prophet said to him?" "Can you afford
to manumit a slave?" He said, "No." The Prophet said, "Can you fast for two
successive months?" He said, "No." The Prophet said, "Can you feed sixty
poor persons?" He said, "No." Then an Ansari man came with an Irq (a big
basket full of dates). The Prophet said (to the man), "Take this (basket) and
give it in charity." That man said, "To poorer people than we, O Allah's
Apostle? By Him Who has sent you with the Truth! There is no house in
between the two mountains (of the city of Medina) poorer than we." So the
Prophet said (to him), "Go and feed it to your family."

Volume 8, Book 79, Number 702:
Narrated Abu Huraira :
A man came to the Prophets and said, "I am ruined!" The Prophet said,
"What is the matter with you?" He said, "I have done a sexual relation with
my wife (while fasting) in Ramadan" The Prophet said to him, "Can you
afford to manumit a slave?" He said, "No." The Prophet said, "Can you fast
for two successive months?" He said, "No." The Prophet said, "Can you feed
sixty poor persons?" He said, "I have nothing." Later on an Irq (big basket)
containing dates was given to the Prophet, and the Prophet said (to him),
"Take this basket and give it in charity." The man said, "To poorer people
than we? Indeed, there is nobody between its (i.e., Medina's) two
mountains who is poorer than we." The Prophet then said, "Take it and feed
your family with it."

Volume 8, Book 79, Number 703:
Narrated Al-Ju'aid bin Abdur-Rahman:
As-Sa'ib bin Yazid said, "The Sa' at the time of the Prophet was equal to one
Mudd plus one-third of a Mudd of your time, and then it was increased in the
time of Caliph 'Umar bin 'Abdul Aziz."
Volume 8, Book 79, Number 704:
Narrated Nafi:
Ibn Umar used to give the Zakat of Ramadan (Zakat-al-Fitr) according to the
Mudd of the Prophet, the first Mudd, and he also used to give things for
expiation for oaths according to the Mudd of the Prophet. Abu Qutaiba said,
"Malik said to us, 'Our Mudd (i.e., of Medina) is better than yours and we do
not see any superiority except in the Mudd of the Prophet!' Malik further
said, to me, 'If a ruler came to you and fixed a Mudd smaller than the one of
the Prophet, by what Mudd would you measure what you give (for
expiation or Zakat-al-Fitr?' I replied, 'We would give it according to the Mudd
of the Prophet' On that, Malik said, 'Then, don't you see that we have to
revert to the Mudd of the Prophet ultimately?'"

Volume 8, Book 79, Number 705:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "O Allah! Bestow Your Blessings on their measures, Sa'
and Mudd (i.e., of the people of Medina) "

Volume 8, Book 79, Number 706:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "If somebody manumits a Muslim slave, Allah will save
from the Fire every part of his body for freeing the corresponding parts of
the slave's body, even his private parts will be saved from the Fire) because
of freeing the slave's private parts."

Volume 8, Book 79, Number 707:
Narrated 'Amr:
Jabir said: An Ansari man made his slave a Mudabbar and he had no other
property than him. When the Prophet heard of that, he said (to his
companions), "Who wants to buy him (i.e., the slave) for me?" Nu'aim bin
An-Nahham bought him for eight hundred Dirhams. I heard Jabir saying,
"That was a coptic slave who died in the same year."

Volume 8, Book 79, Number 708:
Narrated 'Aisha:
that she intended to buy Barira (a slave girl) and her masters stipulated that
they would have her Wala'. When 'Aisha mentioned that to the Prophet ; he
said, "Buy her, for the Wala' is for the one who manumits."

Volume 8, Book 79, Number 709:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari:
I went to Allah's Apostle along with a group of people from (the tribe of) AlAsh'ari, asking for mounts. The Prophet said, "By Allah, I will not give you
anything to ride, and I have nothing to mount you on." We stayed there as
long as Allah wished, and after that, some camels were brought to the
Prophet and he ordered that we be given three camels. When we set out,
some of us said to others, "Allah will not bless us, as we all went to Allah's
Apostle asking him for mounts, and although he had sworn that he would
not give us mounts, he did give us." So we returned to the Prophet; and
mentioned that to him. He said, "I have not provided you with mounts, but
Allah has. By Allah, Allah willing, if I ever take an oath, and then see that
another is better than the first, I make expiration for my (dissolved) oath,
and do what is better and make expiration."

Volume 8, Book 79, Number 710:
Narrated Hammad:
the same narration above (i.e. 709), "I make expiation for my dissolved oath,
and I do what is better, or do what is better and make expiation."

Volume 8, Book 79, Number 711:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
(The Prophet) Solomon said, "Tonight I will sleep with (my) ninety wives,
each of whom will get a male child who will fight for Allah's Cause." On that,
his companion (Sufyan said that his companion was an angel) said to him,
"Say, "If Allah will (Allah willing)." But Solomon forgot (to say it). He slept
with all his wives, but none of the women gave birth to a child, except one
who gave birth to a halfboy. Abu Huraira added: The Prophet said, "If
Solomon had said, "If Allah will" (Allah willing), he would not have been
unsuccessful in his action, and would have attained what he had desired."
Once Abu Huraira added: Allah apostle said, "If he had accepted."

Volume 8, Book 79, Number 712:
Narrated Zahdam al-Jarmi:
We were sitting with Abu Musa Al-Ash'sari, and as there were ties of
friendship and mutual favors between us and his tribe. His meal was
presented before him and there was chicken meat in it. Among those who
were present there was a man from Bani Taimillah having a red complexion
as a non-Arab freed slave, and that man did not approach the meal. Abu
Musa said to him, "Come along! I have seen Allah's Apostle eating of that
(i.e., chicken)." The man said, "I have seen it (chickens) eating something I
regarded as dirty, and so I have taken an oath that I shall not eat (its meat)
chicken." Abu Musa said, "Come along! I will inform you about it (i.e., your
oath).
Once we went to Allah's Apostle in company with a group of Ash'airiyin,
asking him for mounts while he was distributing some camels from the
camels of Zakat. (Aiyub said, "I think he said that the Prophet was in an
angry mood at the time.") The Prophet said, 'By Allah! I will not give you
mounts, and I have nothing to mount you on.' After we had left, some
camels of booty were brought to Allah's Apostle and he said, "Where are
those Ash'ariyin? Where are those Ash'ariyin?" So we went (to him) and he
gave us five very fat good-looking camels. We mounted them and went
away, and then I said to my companions, 'We went to Allah's Apostle to give
us mounts, but he took an oath that he would not give us mounts, and then
later on he sent for us and gave us mounts, perhaps Allah's Apostle forgot
his oath. By Allah, we will never be successful, for we have taken advantage
of the fact that Allah's Apostle forgot to fulfill his oath. So let us return to
Allah's Apostle to remind him of his oath.' We returned and said, 'O Allah's
Apostle! We came to you and asked you for mounts, but you took an oath
that you would not give us mounts) but later on you gave us mounts, and
we thought or considered that you have forgotten your oath.' The Prophet
said, 'Depart, for Allah has given you Mounts. By Allah, Allah willing, if I take
an oath and then later find another thing better than that, I do what is
better, and make expiation for the oath.' "

Volume 8, Book 79, Number 713:
Narrated Zahdam:
the same narration as above (i.e. No. 712).

Volume 8, Book 79, Number 714:
Narrated Zahdam:
the same narration as above (i.e. No. 712).

Volume 8, Book 79, Number 715:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Samura:
Allah's Apostle said, "(O 'Abdur-Rahman!) Do not seek to be a ruler, for, if
you are given the authority of ruling without your asking for it, then Allah
will help you; but if you are given it by your asking, then you will be held
responsible for it (i.e. Allah will not help you ) . And if you take an oath to do
something and later on find another thing, better than that, then do what is
better and make expiation for (the dissolution of) your oath."
BOOK 80. LAWS OF INHERITANCE (AL-FARAA'ID) (716-762)
Volume 8, Book 80, Number 716:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
I became sick so Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr came on foot to pay me a
visit. When they came, I was unconscious. Allah's Apostle performed
ablution and he poured over me the water (of his ablution) and I came to my
senses and said, "O Allah's Apostle! What shall I do regarding my property?
How shall I distribute it?" The Prophet did not reply till the Divine Verses of
inheritance were revealed .

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 717:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, 'Beware of suspicion, for it is the worst of false tales
and don't look for the other's faults and don't spy and don't hate each
other, and don't desert (cut your relations with) one another O Allah's
slaves, be brothers!" (See Hadith No. 90)

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 718:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Fatima and Al 'Abbas came to Abu Bakr, seeking their share from the
property of Allah's Apostle and at that time, they were asking for their land
at Fadak and their share from Khaibar. Abu Bakr said to them, " I have heard
from Allah's Apostle saying, 'Our property cannot be inherited, and
whatever we leave is to be spent in charity, but the family of Muhammad
may take their provisions from this property." Abu Bakr added, "By Allah, I
will not leave the procedure I saw Allah's Apostle following during his
lifetime concerning this property." Therefore Fatima left Abu Bakr and did
not speak to him till she died.
Volume 8, Book 80, Number 719:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "Our (Apostles') property should not be inherited, and
whatever we leave, is to be spent in charity."

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 720:
Narrated Malik bin Aus:
'I went and entered upon 'Umar, his doorman, Yarfa came saying 'Uthman,
'Abdur-Rahman, Az-Zubair and Sa'd are asking your permission (to see you).
May I admit them? 'Umar said, 'Yes.' So he admitted them Then he came
again and said, 'May I admit 'Ali and 'Abbas?' He said, 'Yes.' 'Abbas said, 'O,
chief of the believers! Judge between me and this man (Ali ). 'Umar said, 'I
beseech you by Allah by Whose permission both the heaven and the earth
exist, do you know that Allah's Apostle said, 'Our (the Apostles') property
will not be inherited, and whatever we leave (after our death) is to be spent
in charity?' And by that Allah's Apostle meant himself.' The group said, '(No
doubt), he said so.' 'Umar then faced 'Ali and 'Abbas and said, 'Do you both
know that Allah's Apostle said that?' They replied, '(No doubt), he said so.'
'Umar said, 'So let me talk to you about this matter. Allah favored His
Apostle with something of this Fai' (i.e. booty won by the Muslims at war
without fighting) which He did not give to anybody else;
Allah said:-- 'And what Allah gave to His Apostle ( Fai' Booty) .........to do all
things....(59.6) And so that property was only for Allah's Apostle . Yet, by
Allah, he neither gathered that property for himself nor withheld it from
you, but he gave its income to you, and distributed it among you till there
remained the present property out of which the Prophet used to spend the
yearly maintenance for his family, and whatever used to remain, he used to
spend it where Allah's property is spent (i.e. in charity etc.). Allah's Apostle
followed that throughout his life.
Now I beseech you by Allah, do you know all that?' They said, 'Yes.' 'Umar
then said to 'Ali and 'Abbas, 'I beseech you by Allah, do you know that?'
Both of them said, 'Yes.' 'Umar added, 'And when the Prophet died, Abu
Bakr said, ' I am the successor of Allah's Apostle, and took charge of that
property and managed it in the same way as Allah's Apostle did.
Then I took charge of this property for two years during which I managed it
as Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr did. Then you both ('Ali and 'Abbas) came to
talk to me, bearing the same claim and presenting the same case. (O
'Abbas!) You came to me asking for your share from the property of your
nephew, and this man (Ali) came to me, asking for the share of h is wife
from the property of her father. I said, 'If you both wish, I will give that to
you on that condition (i.e. that you would follow the way of the Prophet and
Abu Bakr and as I (Umar) have done in man aging it).' Now both of you seek
of me a verdict other than that? Lo! By Allah, by Whose permission both the
heaven and the earth exist, I will not give any verdict other than that till the
Hour is established. If you are unable to manage it, then return it to me, and
I will be sufficient to manage it on your behalf.' "

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 721:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Not even a single Dinar of my property should be
distributed (after my deaths to my inheritors, but whatever I leave excluding
the provision for my wives and my servants, should be spent in charity."

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 722:
Narrated 'Urwa:
'Aisha said, "When Allah's Apostle died, his wives intended to send 'Uthman
to Abu Bakr asking him for their share of the inheritance." Then 'Aisha said
to them, "Didn't Allah's Apostle say, 'Our (Apostles') property is not to be
inherited, and whatever we leave is to be spent in charity?'"
Volume 8, Book 80, Number 723:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "I am more closer to the believers than their own selves,
so whoever (of them) dies while being in debt and leaves nothing for its
repayment, then we are to pay his debts on his behalf and whoever (among
the believers) dies leaving some property, then that property is for his
heirs."

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 724:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "Give the Fara'id (the shares of the inheritance that are
prescribed in the Qur'an) to those who are entitled to receive it. Then
whatever remains, should be given to the closest male relative of the
deceased ."

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 725:
Narrated Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas:
I was stricken by an ailment that led me to the verge of death. The Prophet
came to pay me a visit. I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have much property and
no heir except my single daughter. Shall I give two-thirds of my property in
charity?" He said, "No." I said, "Half of it?" He said, "No." I said, "One-third of
it?" He said, "You may do so) though one-third is also to a much, for it is
better for you to leave your off-spring wealthy than to leave them poor,
asking others for help. And whatever you spend (for Allah's sake) you will be
rewarded for it, even for a morsel of food which you may put in the mouth
of your wife." I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Will I remain behind and fail to
complete my emigration?" The Prophet said, "If you are left behind after me,
whatever good deeds you will do for Allah's sake, that will upgrade you and
raise you high. May be you will have long life so that some people may
benefit by you and others (the enemies) be harmed by you." But Allah's
Apostle felt sorry for Sa'd bin Khaula as he died in Mecca. (Sufyan, a subnarrator said that Sa'd bin Khaula was a man from the tribe of Bani 'Amir bin
Lu'ai.)

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 726:
Narrated Al-Aswad bin Yazid:
Mu'adh bin Jabal came to us in Yemen as a tutor and a ruler, and we (the
people of Yemen) asked him about (the distribution of the property of ) a
man who had died leaving a daughter and a sister. Mu'adh gave the
daughter one-half of the property and gave the sister the other half.

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 727:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle said, "Give the Fara'id (shares prescribed in the Qur'an) to
those who are entitled to receive it; and whatever remains, should be given
to the closest male relative of the deceased.'

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 728:
Narrated Huzail bin Shirahbil:
Abu Musa was asked regarding (the inheritance of) a daughter, a son's
daughter, and a sister. He said, "The daughter will take one-half and the
sister will take one-half. If you go to Ibn Mas'ud, he will tell you the same."
Ibn Mas'ud was asked and was told of Abu Musa's verdict. Ibn Mas'ud then
said, "If I give the same verdict, I would stray and would not be of the
rightly-guided. The verdict I will give in this case, will be the same as the
Prophet did, i.e. one-half is for daughter, and one-sixth for the son's
daughter, i.e. both shares make two-thirds of the total property; and the
rest is for the sister." Afterwards we cams to Abu Musa and informed him of
Ibn Mas'ud's verdict, whereupon he said, "So, do not ask me for verdicts, as
long as this learned man is among you."

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 729:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "Give the Fara'id, (the shares prescribed in the Qur'an) to
those who are entitled to receive it, and then whatever remains, should be
given to the closest male relative of the deceased."

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 730:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The person about whom Allah's Apostle said, "If I were to take a Khalil from
this nation (my followers), then I would have taken him (i.e., Abu Bakr), but
the Islamic Brotherhood is better (or said: good)," regarded a grandfather
as the father himself (in inheritance).

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 731:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
(During the early days of Islam), the inheritance used to be given to one's
offspring and legacy used to be bequeathed to the parents, then Allah
cancelled what He wished from that order and decreed that the male should
be given the equivalent of the portion of two females, and for the parents
one-sixth for each of them, and for one's wife one-eighth (if the deceased
has children) and one-fourth (if he has no children), for one's husband onehalf (if the deceased has no children) and one-fourth (if she has children)."

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 732:
Narrated Abu Huraira
Allah's Apostle gave the judgment that a male or female slave should be
given in Qisas for an abortion case of a woman from the tribe of Bani Lihyan
(as blood money for the fetus) but the lady on whom the penalty had been
imposed died, so the Prophets ordered that her property be inherited by her
offspring and her husband and that the penalty be paid by her Asaba.

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 733:
Narrated Al-Aswad:
Mu'adh bin Jabal gave this verdict for us in the lifetime of Allah's Apostle.
One-half of the inheritance is to be given to the daughter and the other half
to the sister. Sulaiman said: Mu'adh gave a verdict for us, but he did not
mention that it was so in the lifetime of Allah's Apostle.

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 734:
Narrated Huzail:
'Abdullah said, "The judgment I will give in this matter will be like the
judgment of the Prophet, i.e. one-half is for the daughter and one-sixth for
the son's daughter and the rest of the inheritance for the sister."

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 735:
Narrated Jabir:
While I was sick, the Prophet entered upon me and asked for some water to
perform ablution, and after he had finished his ablution, he sprinkled some
water of his ablution over me, whereupon I became conscious and said, "O
Allah's Apostle! I have sisters." Then the Divine Verses regarding the laws of
inheritance were revealed.

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 736:
Narrated Al-Bara:
The last Quranic Verse that was revealed (to the Prophet) was the final
Verse of Surat-an-Nisa, i.e., 'They ask you for a legal verdict Say: Allah directs
(thus) About those who leave No descendants or ascendants as heirs....'
(4.176)

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 737:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "I am more closer to the believers than their ownselves,
so whoever (among them) dies leaving some inheritance, his inheritance will
be given to his 'Asaba, and whoever dies leaving a debt or dependants or
destitute children, then I am their supporter."

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 738:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "Give the Fara'id (the shares of the inheritance that are
prescribed in the Qur'an) to those who are entitled to receive it; and
whatever is left should be given to the closest male relative of the
deceased."

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 739:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: regarding the Holy Verse:--'And to everyone, We have
appointed heirs.
When the emigrants came to Medina, the Ansar used to be the heir of the
emigrants (and vice versa) instead of their own kindred by blood (Dhawl-larham), and that was because of the bond of brotherhood which the
Prophet had established between them, i.e. the Ansar and the emigrants.
But when the Divine Verse:--
'And to everyone We have appointed heirs,' (4.33) was revealed, it cancelled
the other, order i.e. 'To those also, to whom Your right hands have pledged.'

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 740:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
A man and his wife had a case of Lian (or Mula'ana) during the lifetime of
the Prophet and the man denied the paternity of her child. The Prophet
gave his verdict for their separation (divorce) and then the child was
regarded as belonging to the wife only.

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 741:
Narrated 'Aisha:
'Utba (bin Abi Waqqas) said to his brother Sa'd, "The son of the slave girl of
Zam'a is my son, so be his custodian." So when it was the year of the
Conquest of Mecca, Sa'd took that child and said, "He is my nephew, and my
brother told me to be his custodian." On that, 'Abu bin Zam'a got up and
said, 'but the child is my brother, and the son of my father's slave girl as he
was born on his bed." So they both went to the Prophet. Sa'd said, "O
Allah's Apostle! (This is) the son of my brother and he told me to be his
custodian." Then 'Abu bin Zam'a said, "(But he is) my brother and the son of
the slave girl of my father, born on his bed." The Prophet said, "This child is
for you. O 'Abu bin Zam'a, as the child is for the owner of the bed, and the
adulterer receives the stones." He then ordered (his wife) Sauda bint Zam'a
to cover herself before that boy as he noticed the boy's resemblance to
'Utba. Since then the boy had never seen Sauda till he died.

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 742:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The boy is for the owner of the bed."
Volume 8, Book 80, Number 743:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I bought Barira (a female slave). The Prophet said (to me), "Buy her as the
Wala' is for the manumitted." Once she was given a sheep (in charity). The
Prophet said, "It (the sheep) is a charitable gift for her (Barira) and a gift for
us." Al-Hakam said, "Barira's husband was a free man." Ibn 'Abbas said,
'When I saw him, he was a slave."

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 744:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "The Wala' is for the manumitted (of the slave)."

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 745:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Muslims did not free slaves as Sa'iba, but the People of the Pre-lslamic
Period of Ignorance used to do so.

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 746:
Narrated Al-Aswad:
'Aisha bought Barira in order to manumit her, but her masters stipulated
that her Wala' (after her death) would be for them. 'Aisha said, "O Allah's
Apostle! I have bought Barira in order to manumit her, but her masters
stipulated that her Wala' will be for them." The Prophet said, "Manumit her
as the Wala is for the one who manumits (the slave)," or said, "The one who
pays her price." Then 'Aisha bought and manumitted her. After that, Barira
was given the choice (by the Prophet) (to stay with her husband or leave
him). She said, "If he gave me so much and so much (money) I would no
stay with him." (Al-Aswad added: Her husband was a free man.) The subnarrator added: The series of the narrators of Al-Aswad's statement is
incomplete. The statement of Ibn Abbas, i.e., when I saw him he was a slave,
is more authentic.

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 747:
Narrated 'Ali:
We have no Book to recite except the Book of Allah (Qur'an) and this paper.
Then 'Ali took out the paper, and behold ! There was written in it, legal
verdicts about the retaliation for wounds, the ages of the camels (to be paid
as Zakat or as blood money). In it was also written: 'Medina is a sanctuary
from Air (mountain) to Thaur (mountain). So whoever innovates in it an
heresy (something new in religion) or commits a crime in it or gives shelter
to such an innovator, will incur the curse of Allah, the angels and all the
people, and none of his compulsory or optional good deeds will be accepted
on the Day of Resurrection. And whoever (a freed slave) takes as his master
(i.e. be-friends) some people other than hi real masters without the
permission of his real masters, will incur the curse of Allah, the angels and all
the people, and none of his compulsory, or optional good deeds will be
accepted on the Day of Resurrection. And the asylum granted by any Muslim
is to be secured by all the Muslims, even if it is granted by one of the lowest
social status among them; and whoever betrays a Muslim, in this respect will
incur the curse of Allah, the angels, and all the people, and none of his
Compulsory or optional good deeds will be accepted on the Day of
Resurrection."

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 748:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet forbade the selling of the Wala' (of slaves) or giving it as a
present.
Volume 8, Book 80, Number 749:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
That Aisha, the mother of the Believers, intended to buy a slave girl in order
to manumit her. The slave girl's master said, "We are ready to sell her to you
on the condition that her Wala should be for us." Aisha mentioned that to
Allah's Apostle who said, "This (condition) should not prevent you from
buying her, for the Wala is for the one who manumits (the slave)."

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 750:
Narrated Al-Aswad:
Aisha said, "I bought Barira and her masters stipulated that the Wala would
be for them." Aisha mentioned that to the Prophet and he said, "Manumit
her, as the Wala is for the one who gives the silver (i.e. pays the price for
freeing the slave)." Aisha added, "So I manumitted her. After that, the
Prophet caller her (Barira) and gave her the choice to go back to her
husband or not. She said, "If he gave me so much and so much (money) I
would not stay with him." So she selected her ownself (i.e. refused to go
back to her husband)."

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 751:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
When Aisha intended to buy Barira, she said to the Prophet, "Barira's
masters stipulated that they will have the Wala." The Prophet said (to
Aisha), "Buy her, as the Wala is for the one who manumits."

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 752:
Narrated Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said, "The wala is for the one who gives the silver (pays the
price) and does the favor (of manumission after paying the price)."

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 753:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "The freed slave belongs to the people who have freed
him," or said something similar.

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 754:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "The son of the sister of some people is from them or
from their own selves."

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 755:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, " If somebody dies (among the Muslims) leaving some
property, the property will go to his heirs; and if he leaves a debt or
dependants, we will take care of them."

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 756:
Narrated Usama bin Zaid:
the Prophet said, "A Muslim cannot be the heir of a disbeliever, nor can a
disbeliever be the heir of a Muslim."

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 757:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas and 'Abu bin Zam'a had a dispute over a boy. Sa'd said,
"O Allah's Apostle! This (boy) is the son of my brother, 'Utba bin Abi Waqqas
who told me to be his custodian as he was his son. Please notice to whom
he bears affinity." And 'Abu bin Zam'a said, "This is my brother, O Allah's
Apostle! He was born on my father's bed by his slave girl." Then the Prophet
looked at the boy and noticed evident resemblance between him and 'Utba,
so he said, "He (the toy) is for you, O 'Abu bin Zam'a, for the boy is for the
owner of the bed, and the stone is for the adulterer. Screen yourself before
the boy, O Sauda bint Zam'a." 'Aisha added: Since then he had never seen
Sauda.

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 758:
Narrated Sa'd:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Whoever claims to be the son of a person other
than his father, and he knows that person is not his father, then Paradise will
be forbidden for him." I mentioned that to Abu Bakra, and he said, "My ears
heard that and my heart memorized it from Allah's Apostle

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 759:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Do not deny your fathers (i.e. claim to be the sons of
persons other than your fathers), and whoever denies his father, is charged
with disbelief."

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 760:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "There were two women with whom there were their
two sons. A wolf came and took away the son of one of them. That lady said
to her companion, 'The wolf has taken your son.' The other said, 'But it has
taken your son.' So both of them sought the judgment of (the Prophet)
David who judged that the boy should be given to the older lady. Then both
of them went to (the Prophet) Solomon, son of David and informed him of
the case. Solomon said, 'Give me a knife so that I may cut the child into two
portions and give one half to each of you.' The younger lady said, 'Do not do
so; may Allah bless you ! He is her child.' On that, he gave the child to the
younger lady." Abu Huraira added: By Allah! I had never heard the word
'Sakkin' as meaning knife, except on that day, for we used to call it 'Mudya"

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 761:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle once entered upon me in a very happy mood, with his
features glittering with joy, and said, "O 'Aisha! won't you see that Mujazziz
(a Qa'if) looked just now at Zaid bin Haritha and Usama bin Zaid and said,
'These feet (of Usama and his father) belong to each other." (See Hadith No.
755, Vol. 4)

Volume 8, Book 80, Number 762:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Once Allah's Apostle entered upon me and he was in a very happy mood and
said, "O 'Aisha: Don't you know that Mujazziz Al-Mudliji entered and saw
Usama and Zaid with a velvet covering on them and their heads were
covered while their feet were uncovered. He said, 'These feet belong to
each other.'
BOOK 81. LIMITS AND PUNISHMENTS SET BY ALLAH (HUDOOD) (763-793)
Volume 8, Book 81, Number 763:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "When an adulterer commits illegal sexual intercourse,
then he is not a believer at the time he is doing it; and when somebody
drinks an alcoholic drink, then he is not believer at the time of drinking, and
when a thief steals, he is not a believer at the time when he is stealing; and
when a robber robs and the people look at him, then he is not a believer at
the time of doing it." Abu Huraira in another narration, narrated the same
from the Prophet with the exclusion of robbery.

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 764:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet beat a drunk with palm-leaf stalks and shoes. And Abu Bakr
gave (such a sinner) forty lashes.

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 765:
Narrated 'Uqba bin Al-Harith:
An-Nu'man or the son of An-Nu'man was brought to the Prophet on a
charge of drunkenness. So the Prophet ordered all the men present in the
house, to beat him. So all of them beat him, and I was also one of them who
beat him with shoes.

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 766:
Narrated 'Uqba bin Al-Harith:
An-Nu'man or the son of An-Nu'man was brought to the Prophet in a state
of intoxication. The Prophet felt it hard (was angry) and ordered all those
who were present in the house, to beat him. And they beat him, using palmleaf stalks and shoes, and I was among those who beat him.

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 767:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet lashed a drunk with dateleaf stalks and shoes. And Abu Bakr
gave a drunk forty lashes.

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 768:
Narrated Abu Salama:
Abu Huraira said, "A man who drank wine was brought to the Prophet. The
Prophet said, 'Beat him!" Abu Huraira added, "So some of us beat him with
our hands, and some with their shoes, and some with their garments (by
twisting it) like a lash, and then when we finished, someone said to him,
'May Allah disgrace you!' On that the Prophet said, 'Do not say so, for you
are helping Satan to overpower him.' "

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 769:
Narrated 'Ali bin Abi Talib:
I would not feel sorry for one who dies because of receiving a legal
punishment, except the drunk, for if he should die (when being punished), I
would give blood money to his family because no fixed punishment has
been ordered by Allah's Apostle for the drunk.

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 770:
Narrated As-Sa'ib bin Yazid
We used to strike the drunks with our hands, shoes, clothes (by twisting it
into the shape of lashes) during the lifetime of the Prophet, Abu Bakr and
the early part of 'Umar's caliphate. But during the last period of 'Umar's
caliphate, he used to give the drunk forty lashes; and when drunks became
mischievous and disobedient, he used to scourge them eighty lashes.

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 771:
Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:
During the lifetime of the Prophet there was a man called 'Abdullah whose
nickname was Donkey, and he used to make Allah's Apostle laugh. The
Prophet lashed him because of drinking (alcohol). And one-day he was
brought to the Prophet on the same charge and was lashed. On that, a man
among the people said, "O Allah, curse him ! How frequently he has been
brought (to the Prophet on such a charge)!" The Prophet said, "Do not curse
him, for by Allah, I know for he loves Allah and His Apostle."

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 772:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A drunk was brought to the Prophet and he ordered him to be beaten
(lashed). Some of us beat him with our hands, and some with their shoes,
and some with their garments (twisted in the form of a lash). When that
drunk had left, a man said, "What is wrong with him? May Allah disgrace
him!" Allah's Apostle said, "Do not help Satan against your (Muslim)
brother."

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 773:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "When (a person) an adulterer commits illegal sexual
intercourse then he is not a believer at the time he is doing it; and when
somebody steals, then he is not a believer at the time he is stealing."

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 774:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah curses a man who steals an egg and gets his hand
cut off, or steals a rope and gets his hands cut off." Al-A'mash said, "People
used to interpret the Baida as an iron helmet, and they used to think that
the rope may cost a few dirhams."

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 775:
Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit:
We were with the Prophet in a gathering and he said, 'Swear allegiance to
me that you will not worship anything besides Allah, Will not steal, and will
not commit illegal sexual intercourse." And then (the Prophet) recited the
whole Verse (i.e. 60:12). The Prophet added, 'And whoever among you
fulfills his pledge, his reward is with Allah; and whoever commits something
of such sins and receives the legal punishment for it, that will be considered
as the expiation for that sin, and whoever commits something of such sins
and Allah screens him, it is up to Allah whether to excuse or punish him."

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 776:
Narrated Abdullah:
Allah Apostle said in Hajjat-al-Wada, "Which month (of the year) do you
think is most sacred?" The people said, "This current month of ours (the
month of Dhull-Hijja)." He said, "Which town (country) do you think is the
most sacred?" They said, "This city of ours (Mecca)." He said, "Which day do
you think is the most sacred?" The people said, "This day of ours." He then
said, "Allah, the Blessed, the Supreme, has made your blood, your property
and your honor as sacred as this day of yours in this town of yours, in this
month of yours (and such protection cannot be slighted) except rightfully."
He then said thrice, "Have I conveyed Allah's Message (to you)?" The people
answered him each time saying, 'Yes." The Prophet added, 'May Allah be
merciful to you (or, woe on you)! Do not revert to disbelief after me by
cutting the necks of each other.'

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 777:
Narrated Aisha:
Whenever the Prophet was given an option between two things, he used to
select the easier of the tow as long as it was not sinful; but if it was sinful, he
would remain far from it. By Allah, he never took revenge for himself
concerning any matter that was presented to him, but when Allah's Limits
were transgressed, he would take revenge for Allah's Sake.

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 778:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Usama approached the Prophet on behalf of a woman (who had committed
theft). The Prophet said, "The people before you were destroyed because
they used to inflict the legal punishments on the poor and forgive the rich.
By Him in Whose Hand my soul is! If Fatima (the daughter of the Prophet )
did that (i.e. stole), I would cut off her hand."

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 779:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Quraish people became very worried about the Makhzumiya lady who
had committed theft. They said, "Nobody can speak (in favor of the lady) to
Allah's Apostle and nobody dares do that except Usama who is the favorite
of Allah's Apostle. " When Usama spoke to Allah's Apostle about that
matter, Allah's Apostle said, "Do you intercede (with me) to violate one of
the legal punishment of Allah?" Then he got up and addressed the people,
saying, "O people! The nations before you went astray because if a noble
person committed theft, they used to leave him, but if a weak person
among them committed theft, they used to inflict the legal punishment on
him. By Allah, if Fatima, the daughter of Muhammad committed theft,
Muhammad will cut off her hand.!"

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 780:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "The hand should be cut off for stealing something that is
worth a quarter of a Dinar or more."

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 781:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "The hand of a thief should be cut off for stealing a
quarter of a Dinar."

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 782:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "The hand should be cut off for stealing a quarter of a
Dinar."

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 783:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The hand of a thief was not cut off during the lifetime of the Prophet except
for stealing something equal to a shield in value.

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 784:
Narrated 'Aisha:
as above (783).

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 785:
Narrated 'Aisha:
A thief's hand was not cut off for stealing something cheaper than a Hajafa
or a Turs (two kinds of shields), each of which was worth a (respectable)
price.

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 786:
Narrated 'Aisha:
A thief's hand was not cut off for stealing something worth less than the
price of a shield, whether a Turs or Hajafa (two kinds of shields), each of
which was worth a (respectable) price.

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 787:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle cut off the hand of a thief for stealing a shield that was
worth three Dirhams.

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 788:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet cut off the hand of a thief for stealing a shield that was worth
three Dirhams.

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 789:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
The Prophet cut off the hand of a thief for stealing a shield that was worth
three Dirhams.

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 790:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
The Prophet cutoff the hand of a thief for stealing a shield that was worth
three Dirhams.

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 791:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah 's Apostle said, "Allah curses the thief who steals an egg (or a helmet)
for which his hand is to be cut off, or steals a rope, for which his hand is to
be cut off."

Volume 8, Book 81, Number 792:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet cut off the hand of a lady, and that lady used to come to me,
and I used to convey her message to the Prophet and she repented, and her
repentance was sincere.
Volume 8, Book 81, Number 793:
Narrated Ubada bin As-Samit:
I gave the pledge of allegiance to the Prophet with a group of people, and
he said, "I take your pledge that you will not worship anything besides Allah,
will not steal, will not commit infanticide, will not slander others by forging
false statements and spreading it, and will not disobey me in anything good.
And whoever among you fulfill all these (obligations of the pledge), his
reward is with Allah. And whoever commits any of the above crimes and
receives his legal punishment in this world, that will be his expiation and
purification. But if Allah screens his sin, it will be up to Allah, Who will either
punish or forgive him according to His wish." Abu Abdullah said: "If a thief
repents after his hand has been cut off, the his witness well be accepted.
Similarly, if any person upon whom any legal punishment has been inflicted,
repents, his witness will be accepted."
BOOK 82. PUNISHMENT OF DISBELIEVERS AT WAR WITH ALLAH AND HIS APOSTLE (794-842)
Volume 8, Book 82, Number 794:
Narrated Anas:
Some people from the tribe of 'Ukl came to the Prophet and embraced
Islam. The climate of Medina did not suit them, so the Prophet ordered
them to go to the (herd of milch) camels of charity and to drink, their milk
and urine (as a medicine). They did so, and after they had recovered from
their ailment (became healthy) they turned renegades (reverted from Islam)
and killed the shepherd of the camels and took the camels away. The
Prophet sent (some people) in their pursuit and so they were (caught and)
brought, and the Prophets ordered that their hands and legs should be cut
off and that their eyes should be branded with heated pieces of iron, and
that their cut hands and legs should not be cauterized, till they die.

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 795:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet cut off the hands and feet of the men belonging to the tribe of
'Uraina and did not cauterise (their bleeding limbs) till they died.

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 796:
Narrated Anas:
A group of people from 'Ukl (tribe) came to the Prophet and they were
living with the people of As-Suffa, but they became ill as the climate of
Medina did not suit them, so they said, "O Allah's Apostle! Provide us with
milk." The Prophet said, I see no other way for you than to use the camels of
Allah's Apostle." So they went and drank the milk and urine of the camels,
(as medicine) and became healthy and fat. Then they killed the shepherd
and took the camels away. When a help-seeker came to Allah's Apostle, he
sent some men in their pursuit, and they were captured and brought before
mid day. The Prophet ordered for some iron pieces to be made red hot, and
their eyes were branded with them and their hands and feet were cut off
and were not cauterized. Then they were put at a place called Al-Harra, and
when they asked for water to drink they were not given till they died. (Abu
Qilaba said, "Those people committed theft and murder and fought against
Allah and His Apostle.")

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 797:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
A group of people from 'Ukl (or 'Uraina) tribe ----but I think he said that they
were from 'Ukl came to Medina and (they became ill, so) the Prophet
ordered them to go to the herd of (Milch) she-camels and told them to go
out and drink the camels' urine and milk (as a medicine). So they went and
drank it, and when they became healthy, they killed the shepherd and drove
away the camels. This news reached the Prophet early in the morning, so he
sent (some) men in their pursuit and they were captured and brought to the
Prophet before midday. He ordered to cut off their hands and legs and their
eyes to be branded with heated iron pieces and they were thrown at AlHarra, and when they asked for water to drink, they were not given water.
(Abu Qilaba said, "Those were the people who committed theft and murder
and reverted to disbelief after being believers (Muslims), and fought against
Allah and His Apostle").

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 798:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Seven (people) will be shaded by Allah by His Shade on
the Day of Resurrection when there will be no shade except His Shade.
(They will be), a just ruler, a young man who has been brought up in the
worship of Allah, a man who remembers Allah in seclusion and his eyes are
then flooded with tears, a man whose heart is attached to mosques (offers
his compulsory congregational prayers in the mosque), two men who love
each other for Allah's Sake, a man who is called by a charming lady of noble
birth to commit illegal sexual intercourse with her, and he says, 'I am afraid
of Allah,' and (finally), a man who gives in charity so secretly that his left
hand does not know what his right hand has given."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 799:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:
The Prophet said, "Whoever guarantees me (the chastity of) what is
between his legs (i.e. his private parts), and what is between his jaws (i.e.,
his tongue), I guarantee him Paradise."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 800i:
Narrated Anas:
I will narrate to you a narration which nobody will narrate to you after me. I
heard that form the Prophet. I heard the Prophet saying, "The Hour sill not
be established" or said: "From among the portents of the Hour is that the
religious knowledge will betaken away (by the death of religious Scholars)
and general ignorance (of religion) will appear; and the drinking of alcoholic
drinks will be very common, and (open) illegal sexual intercourse will prevail,
and men will decrease in number while women will increase so much so
that, for fifty women there will only be one man to look after them."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 800e:
Narrated 'Ikrima from Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostles said, "When a slave (of Allah) commits illegal sexual
intercourse, he is not a believer at the time of committing it; and if he steals,
he is not a believer at the time of stealing; and if he drinks an alcoholic drink,
when he is not a believer at the time of drinking it; and he is not a believer
when he commits a murder," 'Ikrima said: I asked Ibn Abbas, "How is faith
taken away from him?" He said, Like this," by clasping his hands and then
separating them, and added, "But if he repents, faith returns to him like this,
by clasping his hands again.

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 801:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The one who commits an illegal sexual intercourse is not
a believer at the time of committing illegal sexual intercourse and a thief is
not a believer at the time of committing theft and a drinker of alcoholic
drink is not a believer at the time of drinking. Yet, (the gate of) repentance is
open thereafter."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 802:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud:
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Which is the biggest sin?" He said, "To set up rivals
to Allah by worshipping others though He alone has created you." I asked,
"What is next?" He said, "To kill your child lest it should share your food." I
asked, "What is next?" He said, "To commit illegal sexual intercourse with
the wife of your neighbor."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 803:
Narrated Ash-Sha'bi:
from 'Ali when the latter stoned a lady to death on a Friday. 'Ali said, "I have
stoned her according to the tradition of Allah's Apostle."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 804:
Narrated Ash Shaibani:
I asked 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa, 'Did Allah's Apostle carry out the Rajam
penalty ( i.e., stoning to death)?' He said, "Yes." I said, "Before the
revelation of Surat-ar-Nur or after it?" He replied, "I don't Know."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 805:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah Al-Ansari:
A man from the tribe of Bani Aslam came to Allah's Apostle and Informed
him that he had committed illegal sexual intercourse and bore witness four
times against himself. Allah's Apostle ordered him to be stoned to death as
he was a married Person.

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 806:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man came to Allah's Apostle while he was in the mosque, and he called
him, saying, "O Allah's Apostle! I have committed illegal sexual intercourse.'"
The Prophet turned his face to the other side, but that man repeated his
statement four times, and after he bore witness against himself four times,
the Prophet called him, saying, "Are you mad?" The man said, "No." The
Prophet said, "Are you married?" The man said, "Yes." Then the Prophet
said, 'Take him away and stone him to death." Jabir bin 'Abdullah said: I was
among the ones who participated in stoning him and we stoned him at the
Musalla. When the stones troubled him, he fled, but we over took him at AlHarra and stoned him to death.

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 807:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas and 'Abd bin Zam'a quarrelled with each other
(regarding a child). The Prophet said, "The boy is for you, O 'Abd bin Zam'a,
for the boy is for (the owner) of the bed. O Sauda ! Screen yourself from the
boy." The sub-narrator, Al-Laith added (that the Prophet also said), "And the
stone is for the person who commits an illegal sexual intercourse."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 808:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The boy is for (the owner of) the bed and the stone is for
the person who commits illegal sexual intercourse.'

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 809:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
A Jew and a Jewess were brought to Allah's Apostle on a charge of
committing an illegal sexual intercourse. The Prophet asked them. "What is
the legal punishment (for this sin) in your Book (Torah)?" They replied, "Our
priests have innovated the punishment of blackening the faces with
charcoal and Tajbiya." 'Abdullah bin Salam said, "O Allah's Apostle, tell them
to bring the Torah." The Torah was brought, and then one of the Jews put
his hand over the Divine Verse of the Rajam (stoning to death) and started
reading what preceded and what followed it. On that, Ibn Salam said to the
Jew, "Lift up your hand." Behold! The Divine Verse of the Rajam was under
his hand. So Allah's Apostle ordered that the two (sinners) be stoned to
death, and so they were stoned. Ibn 'Umar added: So both of them were
stoned at the Balat and I saw the Jew sheltering the Jewess.

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 810:
Narrated Jabir:
A man from the tribe of Aslam came to the Prophet and confessed that he
had committed an illegal sexual intercourse. The Prophet turned his face
away from him till the man bore witness against himself four times. The
Prophet said to him, "Are you mad?" He said "No." He said, "Are you
married?" He said, "Yes." Then the Prophet ordered that he be stoned to
death, and he was stoned to death at the Musalla. When the stones
troubled him, he fled, but he was caught and was stoned till he died. The
Prophet spoke well of him and offered his funeral prayer.

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 811d:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A person had sexual relation with his wife in the month of Ramadan (while
he was fasting), and he came to Allah's Apostle seeking his verdict
concerning that action. The Prophet said (to him), "Can you afford to
manumit a slave?" The man said, "No." The Prophet said, "Can you fast for
two successive months?" He said, "No." The Prophet said, "Then feed sixty
poor persons."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 811e:
Narrated 'Aisha:
A man came to the Prophet in the mosque and said, "I am burnt (ruined)!"
The Prophet asked him, "With what (what have you done)?" He said, "I have
had sexual relation with my wife in the month of Ramadan (while fasting)."
The Prophet said to him, "Give in charity." He said, "I have nothing." The
man sat down, and in the meantime there came a person driving a donkey
carrying food to the Prophet ..... (The sub-narrator, 'Abdur Rahman added: I
do not know what kind of food it was). On that the Prophet said, "Where is
the burnt person?" The man said, "Here I am." The Prophet said to him,
"Take this (food) and give it in charity (to someone)." The man said, "To a
poorer person than l? My family has nothing to eat." Then the Prophet said
to him, "Then eat it yourselves."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 812:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
While I was with the Prophet a man came and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have
committed a legally punishable sin; please inflict the legal punishment on
me'.' The Prophet did not ask him what he had done. Then the time for the
prayer became due and the man offered prayer along with the Prophet , and
when the Prophet had finished his prayer, the man again got up and said, "O
Allah's Apostle! I have committed a legally punishable sin; please inflict the
punishment on me according to Allah's Laws." The Prophet said, "Haven't
you prayed with us?' He said, "Yes." The Prophet said, "Allah has forgiven
your sin." or said, "....your legally punishable sin."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 813:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
When Ma'iz bin Malik came to the Prophet (in order to confess), the
Prophet said to him, "Probably you have only kissed (the lady), or winked, or
looked at her?" He said, "No, O Allah's Apostle!" The Prophet said, using no
euphemism, "Did you have sexual intercourse with her?" The narrator
added: At that, (i.e. after his confession) the Prophet ordered that he be
stoned (to death).

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 814:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man from among the people, came to Allah's Apostle while Allah's Apostle
was sitting in the mosque, and addressed him, saying, "O Allah's Apostle! I
have committed an illegal sexual intercourse." The Prophet turned his face
away from him. The man came to that side to which the Prophet had turned
his face, and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have committed an illegal
intercourse." The Prophet turned his face to the other side, and the man
came to that side, and when he confessed four times, the Prophet called
him and said, "Are you mad?" He said, "No, O Allah's Apostle!" The Prophet
said, "Are you married?" He said, "Yes, O Allah's Apostle." The Prophet said
(to the people), "Take him away and stone him to death." Ibn Shihab added,
"I was told by one who heard Jabir, that Jabir said, 'I was among those who
stoned the man, and we stoned him at the Musalla ('Id praying Place), and
when the stones troubled him, he jumped quickly and ran away, but we
overtook him at Al-Harra and stoned him to death (there).' "

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 815:
Narrated Abu Huraira and Zaid bin Khalid:
While we were with the Prophet , a man stood up and said (to the Prophet ),
"I beseech you by Allah, that you should judge us according to Allah's Laws."
Then the man's opponent who was wiser than him, got up saying (to Allah's
Apostle) "Judge us according to Allah's Law and kindly allow me (to
speak)." The Prophet said, "'Speak." He said, "My son was a laborer working
for this man and he committed an illegal sexual intercourse with his wife,
and I gave one-hundred sheep and a slave as a ransom for my son's sin. Then
I asked a learned man about this case and he informed me that my son
should receive one hundred lashes and be exiled for one year, and the man's
wife should be stoned to death." The Prophet said, "By Him in Whose Hand
my soul is, I will judge you according to the Laws of Allah. Your one-hundred
sheep and the slave are to be returned to you, and your son has to receive
one-hundred lashes and be exiled for one year. O Unais! Go to the wife of
this man, and if she confesses, then stone her to death." Unais went to her
and she confessed. He then stoned her to death.

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 816:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
'Umar said, "I am afraid that after a long time has passed, people may say,
"We do not find the Verses of the Rajam (stoning to death) in the Holy
Book," and consequently they may go astray by leaving an obligation that
Allah has revealed. Lo! I confirm that the penalty of Rajam be inflicted on
him who commits illegal sexual intercourse, if he is already married and the
crime is proved by witnesses or pregnancy or confession." Sufyan added, "I
have memorized this narration in this way." 'Umar added, "Surely Allah's
Apostle carried out the penalty of Rajam, and so did we after him."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 817:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
I used to teach (the Qur'an to) some people of the Muhajirln (emigrants),
among whom there was 'Abdur Rahman bin 'Auf. While I was in his house at
Mina, and he was with 'Umar bin Al-Khattab during 'Umar's last Hajj, AbdurRahman came to me and said, "Would that you had seen the man who came
today to the Chief of the Believers ('Umar), saying, 'O Chief of the Believers!
What do you think about so-and-so who says, 'If 'Umar should die, I will give
the pledge of allegiance to such-and-such person, as by Allah, the pledge of
allegiance to Abu Bakr was nothing but a prompt sudden action which got
established afterwards.' 'Umar became angry and then said, 'Allah willing, I
will stand before the people tonight and warn them against those people
who want to deprive the others of their rights (the question of rulership)."
'Abdur-Rahman said, "I said, 'O Chief of the believers! Do not do that, for the
season of Hajj gathers the riff-raff and the rubble, and it will be they who will
gather around you when you stand to address the people. And I am afraid
that you will get up and say something, and some people will spread your
statement and may not say what you have actually said and may not
understand its meaning, and may interpret it incorrectly, so you should wait
till you reach Medina, as it is the place of emigration and the place of
Prophet's Traditions, and there you can come in touch with the learned and
noble people, and tell them your ideas with confidence; and the learned
people will understand your statement and put it in its proper place.' On
that, 'Umar said, 'By Allah! Allah willing, I will do this in the first speech I will
deliver before the people in Medina."
Ibn Abbas added: We reached Medina by the end of the month of Dhul-Hijja,
and when it was Friday, we went quickly (to the mosque) as soon as the sun
had declined, and I saw Sa'id bin Zaid bin 'Amr bin Nufail sitting at the corner
of the pulpit, and I too sat close to him so that my knee was touching his
knee, and after a short while 'Umar bin Al-Khattab came out, and when I
saw him coming towards us, I said to Said bin Zaid bin 'Amr bin Nufail
"Today 'Umar will say such a thing as he has never said since he was chosen
as Caliph." Said denied my statement with astonishment and said, "What
thing do you expect 'Umar to say the like of which he has never said
before?"
In the meantime, 'Umar sat on the pulpit and when the callmakers for the
prayer had finished their call, 'Umar stood up, and having glorified and
praised Allah as He deserved, he said, "Now then, I am going to tell you
something which (Allah) has written for me to say. I do not know; perhaps it
portends my death, so whoever understands and remembers it, must
narrate it to the others wherever his mount takes him, but if somebody is
afraid that he does not understand it, then it is unlawful for him to tell lies
about me. Allah sent Muhammad with the Truth and revealed the Holy Book
to him, and among what Allah revealed, was the Verse of the Rajam (the
stoning of married person (male & female) who commits illegal sexual
intercourse, and we did recite this Verse and understood and memorized it.
Allah's Apostle did carry out the punishment of stoning and so did we after
him.
I am afraid that after a long time has passed, somebody will say, 'By Allah,
we do not find the Verse of the Rajam in Allah's Book,' and thus they will go
astray by leaving an obligation which Allah has revealed. And the
punishment of the Rajam is to be inflicted to any married person (male &
female), who commits illegal sexual intercourse, if the required evidence is
available or there is conception or confession. And then we used to recite
among the Verses in Allah's Book: 'O people! Do not claim to be the
offspring of other than your fathers, as it is disbelief (unthankfulness) on
your part that you claim to be the offspring of other than your real father.'
Then Allah's Apostle said, 'Do not praise me excessively as Jesus, son of
Marry was praised, but call me Allah's Slave and His Apostles.' (O people!) I
have been informed that a speaker amongst you says, 'By Allah, if 'Umar
should die, I will give the pledge of allegiance to such-and-such person.' One
should not deceive oneself by saying that the pledge of allegiance given to
Abu Bakr was given suddenly and it was successful. No doubt, it was like
that, but Allah saved (the people) from its evil, and there is none among you
who has the qualities of Abu Bakr. Remember that whoever gives the
pledge of allegiance to anybody among you without consulting the other
Muslims, neither that person, nor the person to whom the pledge of
allegiance was given, are to be supported, lest they both should be killed.
And no doubt after the death of the Prophet we were informed that the
Ansar disagreed with us and gathered in the shed of Bani Sa'da. 'Ali and
Zubair and whoever was with them, opposed us, while the emigrants
gathered with Abu Bakr. I said to Abu Bakr, 'Let's go to these Ansari
brothers of ours.' So we set out seeking them, and when we approached
them, two pious men of theirs met us and informed us of the final decision
of the Ansar, and said, 'O group of Muhajirin (emigrants) ! Where are you
going?' We replied, 'We are going to these Ansari brothers of ours.' They
said to us, 'You shouldn't go near them. Carry out whatever we have already
decided.' I said, 'By Allah, we will go to them.' And so we proceeded until we
reached them at the shed of Bani Sa'da. Behold! There was a man sitting
amongst them and wrapped in something. I asked, 'Who is that man?' They
said, 'He is Sa'd bin 'Ubada.' I asked, 'What is wrong with him?' They said,
'He is sick.' After we sat for a while, the Ansar's speaker said, 'None has the
right to be worshipped but Allah,' and praising Allah as He deserved, he
added, 'To proceed, we are Allah's Ansar (helpers) and the majority of the
Muslim army, while you, the emigrants, are a small group and some people
among you came with the intention of preventing us from practicing this
matter (of caliphate) and depriving us of it.'
When the speaker had finished, I intended to speak as I had prepared a
speech which I liked and which I wanted to deliver in the presence of Abu
Bakr, and I used to avoid provoking him. So, when I wanted to speak, Abu
Bakr said, 'Wait a while.' I disliked to make him angry. So Abu Bakr himself
gave a speech, and he was wiser and more patient than I. By Allah, he never
missed a sentence that I liked in my own prepared speech, but he said the
like of it or better than it spontaneously. After a pause he said, 'O Ansar! You
deserve all (the qualities that you have attributed to yourselves, but this
question (of Caliphate) is only for the Quraish as they are the best of the
Arabs as regards descent and home, and I am pleased to suggest that you
choose either of these two men, so take the oath of allegiance to either of
them as you wish. And then Abu Bakr held my hand and Abu Ubada bin
Abdullah's hand who was sitting amongst us. I hated nothing of what he had
said except that proposal, for by Allah, I would rather have my neck
chopped off as expiator for a sin than become the ruler of a nation, one of
whose members is Abu Bakr, unless at the time of my death my own-self
suggests something I don't feel at present.'
And then one of the Ansar said, 'I am the pillar on which the camel with a
skin disease (eczema) rubs itself to satisfy the itching (i.e., I am a noble), and
I am as a high class palm tree! O Quraish. There should be one ruler from us
and one from you.'
Then there was a hue and cry among the gathering and their voices rose so
that I was afraid there might be great disagreement, so I said, 'O Abu Bakr!
Hold your hand out.' He held his hand out and I pledged allegiance to him,
and then all the emigrants gave the Pledge of allegiance and so did the
Ansar afterwards. And so we became victorious over Sa'd bin Ubada (whom
Al-Ansar wanted to make a ruler). One of the Ansar said, 'You have killed
Sa'd bin Ubada.' I replied, 'Allah has killed Sa'd bin Ubada.' Umar added, "By
Allah, apart from the great tragedy that had happened to us (i.e. the death
of the Prophet), there was no greater problem than the allegiance pledged
to Abu Bakr because we were afraid that if we left the people, they might
give the Pledge of allegiance after us to one of their men, in which case we
would have given them our consent for something against our real wish, or
would have opposed them and caused great trouble. So if any person gives
the Pledge of allegiance to somebody (to become a Caliph) without
consulting the other Muslims, then the one he has selected should not be
granted allegiance, lest both of them should be killed."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 818:
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid Al-Jihani:
I heard the Prophet ordering that an unmarried person guilty of illegal
sexual intercourse be flogged one-hundred stripes and be exiled for one
year. Umar bin Al-Khattab also exiled such a person, and this tradition is still
valid.

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 819:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle judged that the unmarried person who was guilty of illegal
sexual intercourse be exiled for one year and receive the legal punishment
(i.e., be flogged with one-hundred stripes) .

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 820:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet cursed the effeminate men and those women who assume the
similitude (manners) of men. He also said, "Turn them out of your houses."
He turned such-and-such person out, and 'Umar also turned out such-andsuch person.

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 821:
Narrated Abu Huraira and Zaid bin Khalid:
A bedouin came to the Prophet while he (the Prophet) was sitting, and said,
"O Allah's Apostle! Give your verdict according to Allah's Laws (in our case)."
Then his opponent got up and said, "He has told the truth, O Allah's Apostle!
Decide his case according to Allah's Laws. My son was a laborer working for
this person, and he committed illegal sexual intercourse with his wife, and
the people told me that my son should be stoned to death, but I offered
one-hundred sheep and a slave girl as a ransom for him. Then I asked the
religious learned people, and they told me that my son should be flogged
with one-hundred stripes and be exiled for one year." The Prophet said, "By
Him in Whose Hand my soul is, I will judge you according to Allah's Laws.
The sheep and the slave girl will be returned to you and your son will be
flogged one-hundred stripes and be exiled for one year. And you, O Unais!
Go to the wife of this man (and if she confesses), stone her to death." So
Unais went in the morning and stoned her to death (after she had
confessed).

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 822:
Narrated Abu Huraira and Said bin Khalid:
The verdict of Allah's Apostle was sought about an unmarried slave girl
guilty of illegal intercourse. He replied, "If she commits illegal sexual
intercourse, then flog her (fifty stripes), and if she commits illegal sexual
intercourse (after that for the second time), then flog her (fifty stripes), and
if she commits illegal sexual intercourse (for the third time), then flog her
(fifty stripes) and sell her for even a hair rope." Ibn Shihab said, "I am not
sure whether the Prophet ordered that she be sold after the third or fourth
time of committing illegal intercourse."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 823:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "If a lady slave commits illegal sexual intercourse and she
is proved guilty of illegal sexual intercourse, then she should be flogged
(fifty stripes) but she should not be admonished; and if she commits illegal
sexual intercourse again, then she should be flogged again but should not
be admonished; and if she commits illegal sexual intercourse for the third
time, then she should be sold even for a hair rope."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 824:
Narrated Ash-Shaibani:
I asked 'Abdullah bin Abi 'Aufa about the Rajam (stoning somebody to death
for committing illegal sexual intercourse). He replied, "The Prophet carried
out the penalty of Rajam," I asked, "Was that before or after the revelation
of Surat-an-Nur?" He replied, "I do not know."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 825:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
The jews came to Allah's Apostle and mentioned to him that a man and a
lady among them had committed illegal sexual intercourse. Allah's Apostle
said to them, "What do you find in the Torah regarding the Rajam?" They
replied, "We only disgrace and flog them with stripes." 'Abdullah bin Salam
said to them, 'You have told a lie the penalty of Rajam is in the Torah.' They
brought the Torah and opened it. One of them put his hand over the verse
of the Rajam and read what was before and after it. Abdullah bin Salam said
to him, "Lift up your hand." Where he lifted it there appeared the verse of
the Rajam. So they said, "O Muhammad! He has said the truth, the verse of
the Rajam is in it (Torah)." Then Allah's Apostle ordered that the two
persons (guilty of illegal sexual intercourse) be stoned to death, and so they
were stoned, and I saw the man bending over the woman so as to protect
her from the stones.

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 826:
Narrated Abu Huraira and Zaid bin Khalid:
Two men had a dispute in the presence of Allah's Apostle. One of them said,
"Judge us according to Allah's Laws." The other who was more wise said,
"Yes, Allah's Apostle, judge us according to Allah's Laws and allow me to
speak (first)" The Prophet said to him, 'Speak " He said, "My son was a
laborer for this man, and he committed illegal sexual intercourse with his
wife, and the people told me that my son should be stoned to death, but I
have given one-hundred sheep and a slave girl as a ransom (expiation) for
my son's sin. Then I asked the religious learned people (about It), and they
told me that my son should he flogged one-hundred stripes and should be
exiled for one year, and only the wife of this man should be stoned to death
" Allah's Apostle said, "By Him in Whose Hand my soul is, I will judge you
according to Allah's Laws: O man, as for your sheep and slave girl, they are
to be returned to you." Then the Prophet had the man's son flogged one
hundred stripes and exiled for one year, and ordered Unais Al-Aslami to go
to the wife of the other man, and if she confessed, stone her to death. She
confessed and was stoned to death.

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 827:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Abu Bakr came to me while Allah's Apostle was sleeping with his head on my
thigh. Abu Bakr said (to me), "You have detained Allah's Apostle and the
people, and there is no water in this place." So he admonished me and
struck my flanks with his hand, and nothing could stop me from moving
except the reclining of Allah's Apostle (on my thigh), and then Allah
revealed the Divine Verse of Tayammum.

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 828:
Narrated Aisha:
Abu Bakr came to towards me and struck me violently with his fist and said,
"You have detained the people because of your necklace." But I remained
motionless as if I was dead lest I should awake Allah's Apostle although that
hit was very painful.

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 829:
Narrated Al-Mughira:
Sa'd bin Ubada said, "If I found a man with my wife, I would kill him with the
sharp side of my sword." When the Prophet heard that he said, "Do you
wonder at Sa'd's sense of ghira (self-respect)? Verily, I have more sense of
ghira than Sa'd, and Allah has more sense of ghira than I."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 830:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A bedouin came to Allah's Apostle and said, "My wife has delivered a black
child." The Prophet said to him, "Have you camels?" He replied, "Yes." The
Prophet said, "What color are they?" He replied, "They are red." The Prophet
further asked, "Are any of them gray in color?" He replied, "Yes." The
Prophet asked him, "Whence did that grayness come?" He said, "I thing it
descended from the camel's ancestors." Then the Prophet said (to him),
"Therefore, this child of yours has most probably inherited the color from
his ancestors."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 831:
Narrated Abu Burda:
The Prophet used to say, "Nobody should be flogged more than ten stripes
except if he is guilty of a crime, the legal punishment of which is assigned by
Allah."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 832:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Jabir:
On the authority of others, that the Prophet said, "No Punishment exceeds
the flogging of the ten stripes, except if one is guilty of a crime necessitating
a legal punishment prescribed by Allah."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 833:
Narrated Abu Burda Al-Ansari
I heard the Prophet saying, "Do not flog anyone more than ten stripes
except if he is involved in a crime necessitating Allah's legal Punishment."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 834:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle forbade Al-Wisal (fasting continuously for more than one day
without taking any meals). A man from the Muslims said, "But you do AlWisal, O Allah's Apostle!" Allah's Apostle I said, "Who among you is similar to
me? I sleep and my Lord makes me eat and drink." When the people refused
to give up Al-Wisal, the Prophet fasted along with them for one day, and did
not break his fast but continued his fast for another day, and when they saw
the crescent, the Prophet said, "If the crescent had not appeared, I would
have made you continue your fast (for a third day)," as if he wanted to
punish them for they had refused to give up Al-Wisal.

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 835:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Those people who used to buy foodstuff at random (without weighing or
measuring it) were beaten in the lifetime of Allah's Apostle if they sold it at
the very place where they had bought it, till they carried it to their dwelling
places.

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 836:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle never took revenge for his own self in any matter presented
to him till Allah's limits were exceeded, in which case he would take revenge
for Allah's sake.
Volume 8, Book 82, Number 837:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:
I witnessed the case of Lian (the case of a man who charged his wife for
committing illegal sexual intercourse when I was fifteen years old. The
Prophet ordered that they be divorced, and the husband said, "If I kept her,
I would be a liar." I remember that Az-Zubair also said, "(It was said) that if
that woman brought forth the child with such-and-such description, her
husband would prove truthful, but if she brought it with such-and-such
description looking like a Wahra (a red insect), he would prove untruthful." I
heard Az-Zubair also saying, "Finally she gave birth to a child of description
which her husband disliked .

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 838:
Narrated Al-Qasim bin Muhammad:
Ibn 'Abbas mentioned the couple who had taken the oath of Lian. 'Abdullah
bin Shaddad said (to him), "Was this woman about whom Allah's Apostle
said, 'If I were ever to stone to death any woman without witnesses. (I
would have stoned that woman to death)?' Ibn 'Abbas replied," No, that
lady exposed herself (by her suspicious behavior)."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 839:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Lian was mentioned in the presence of the Prophet, Asim bin Adi said a
statement about it, and when he left, a man from his tribe came to him
complaining that he had seen a man with his wife. Asim said, "I have been
put to trial only because of my statement." So he took the man to the
Prophet and the man told him about the incident. The man (husband) was
of yellow complexion, thin, and of lank hair, while the man whom he had
accused of having been with his wife, was reddish brown with fat thick legs
and fat body. The Prophet said, "O Allah! Reveal the truth." Later on the lady
delivered a child resembling the man whom the husband had accused of
having been with her. So the Prophet made them take the oath of Lian. A
man said to Ibn Abbas in the gathering, "Was that the same lady about
whom the Prophet said, "If I were to stone any lady (for committing illegal
sexual intercourse) to death without witnesses, I would have stoned that
lade to death?" Ibn Abbas said, "No, that was another lady who used to
behave in such a suspicious way among the Muslims that one might accuse
her of committing illegal sexual intercourse."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 840:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Avoid the seven great destructive sins." They (the
people!) asked, "O Allah's Apostle! What are they?" He said, "To join
partners in worship with Allah; to practice sorcery; to kill the life which Allah
has forbidden except for a just cause (according to Islamic law); to eat up
usury (Riba), to eat up the property of an orphan; to give one's back to the
enemy and freeing from the battle-field at the time of fighting and to accuse
chaste women who never even think of anything touching chastity and are
good believers."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 841:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Abu-l-Qasim (the Prophet) saying, "If somebody slanders his slave
and the slave is free from what he says, he will be flogged on the Day of
Resurrection unless the slave is really as he has described him."

Volume 8, Book 82, Number 842:
Narrated Abu Huraira and Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani:
A man came to the Prophet and said, "I beseech you to judge us according
to Allah's Laws." Then his opponent who was wiser than he, got up and said,
"He has spoken the truth. So judge us according to Allah's Laws and please
allow me (to speak), O Allah's Apostle." The Prophet said, "Speak." He said,
"My son was a laborer for the family of this man and he committed illegal
sexual intercourse with his wife, and I gave one-hundred sheep and a slave
as a ransom (for my son), but I asked the religious learned people (regarding
this case), and they informed me that my son should be flogged onehundred stripes, and be exiled for one year, and the wife of this man should
be stoned (to death)."The Prophet said, "By Him in Whose Hand my soul is, I
will Judge you (in this case) according to Allah's Laws. The one-hundred
(sheep) and the slave shall be returned to you and your son shall be flogged
one-hundred stripes and be exiled for one year. And O Unais! Go in the
morning to the wife of this man and ask her, and if she confesses, stone her
to death." She confessed and he stoned her to death.
VOLUME 9
BOOK 83. BLOOD MONEY (AD-DIYAT) (1-52)
Volume 9, Book 83, Number 1:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
A man said, "O Allah's Apostle! Which sin is the greatest in Allah's Sight?"
The Prophet said, "To set up a rival unto Allah though He Alone created you .
" The man said, "What is next?" The Prophet said, "To kill your son lest he
should share your food with you." The man said, "What is next?" The
Prophet said, "To commit illegal sexual intercourse with the wife of your
neighbor." So Allah revealed in confirmation of this narration:-'And those who invoke not with Allah, any other god. Nor kill, such life as
Allah has forbidden except for just cause nor commit illegal sexual
intercourse. And whoever does this shall receive the punishment.' (25.68)

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 2:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "A faithful believer remains at liberty regarding his
religion unless he kills somebody unlawfully."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 3:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
One of the evil deeds with bad consequence from which there is no escape
for the one who is involved in it is to kill someone unlawfully.

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 4:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "The first cases to be decided among the people (on the
Day of Resurrection) will be those of blood-shed."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 5:
Narrated Al-Miqdad bin 'Amr Al-Kindi:
An ally of Bani Zuhra who took part in the battle of Badr with the Prophet,
that he said, "O Allah's Apostle! If I meet an unbeliever and we have a fight,
and he strikes my hand with the sword and cuts it off, and then takes refuge
from me under a tree, and says, 'I have surrendered to Allah (i.e. embraced
Islam),' may I kill him after he has said so?" Allah's Apostle said, "Do not kill
him." Al-Miqdad said, "But O Allah's Apostle! He had chopped off one of my
hands and he said that after he had cut it off. May I kill him?" The Prophet
said. "Do not kill him for if you kill him, he would be in the position in which
you had been before you kill him, and you would be in the position in which
he was before he said the sentence." The Prophet also said to Al-Miqdad, "If
a faithful believer conceals his faith (Islam) from the disbelievers, and then
when he declares his Islam, you kill him, (you will be sinful). Remember that
you were also concealing your faith (Islam) at Mecca before."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 6:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "No human being is killed unjustly, but a part of
responsibility for the crime is laid on the first son of Adam who invented the
tradition of killing (murdering) on the earth. (It is said that he was Qabil).

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 7:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "After me (i.e. after my death), do not become
disbelievers, by striking (cutting) the necks of one another.
Volume 9, Book 83, Number 8:
Narrated Abu Zur'a bin 'Amr bin Jarir:
The Prophet said during Hajjat-al-Wada', "Let the people be quiet and listen
to me. After me, do not become disbelievers, by striking (cutting) the necks
of one another."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 9:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
The Prophet said, "Al-Kaba'ir (the biggest sins) are: To join others (as
partners) in worship with Allah, to be undutiful to one's parents," or said,
"to take a false oath." (The sub-narrator, Shu'ba is not sure) Mu'adh said:
Shu'ba said, "Al-kaba'ir (the biggest sins) are: (1) Joining others as partners
in worship with Allah, (2) to take a false oath (3) and to be undutiful to one's
parents," or said, "to murder (someone unlawfully).

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 10:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "The biggest of Al-Kaba'ir (the great sins) are (1) to join
others as partners in worship with Allah, (2) to murder a human being, (3) to
be undutiful to one's parents (4) and to make a false statement," or said, "to
give a false witness."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 11:
Narrated Usama bin Zaid bin Haritha:
Allah's Apostle sent us (to fight) against Al-Huraqa (one of the sub-tribes) of
Juhaina. We reached those people in the morning and defeated them. A
man from the Ansar and I chased one of their men and when we attacke
him, he said, "None has the right to be worshipped but Allah." The Ansari
refrained from killing him but I stabbed him with my spear till I killed him.
When we reached (Medina), this news reached the Prophet. He said to me,
"O Usama! You killed him after he had said, 'None has the right to be
worshipped but Allah?"' I said, "O Allah's Apostle! He said so in order to save
himself." The Prophet said, "You killed him after he had said, 'None has the
right to be worshipped but Allah." The Prophet kept on repeating that
statement till I wished I had not been a Muslim before that day.

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 12:
Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samat:
I was among those Naqibs (selected leaders) who gave the Pledge of
allegiance to Allah's Apostle. We gave the oath of allegiance, that we would
not join partners in worship besides Allah, would not steal, would not
commit illegal sexual intercourse, would not kill a life which Allah has
forbidden, would not commit robbery, would not disobey (Allah and His
Apostle), and if we fulfilled this pledge we would have Paradise, but if we
committed any one of these (sins), then our case will be decided by Allah.

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 13:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "Whoever carries arms against us, is not from us."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 14:
Narrated Al-Ahnaf bin Qais:
I went to help that man (i.e., 'Ali), and on the way I met Abu Bakra who
asked me, "Where are you going?" I replied, "I am going to help that man."
He said, "Go back, for I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'If two Muslims meet
each other with their swords then (both) the killer and the killed one are in
the (Hell) Fire.' I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! It is alright for the killer, but what
about the killed one?' He said, 'The killed one was eager to kill his
opponent."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 15:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
A Jew crushed the head of a girl between two stones, and the girl was
asked, "Who has done that to you, so-and-so or so and so?" (Some names
were mentioned for her) till the name of that Jew was mentioned
(whereupon she agreed). The Jew was brought to the Prophet and the
Prophet kept on questioning him till he confessed, whereupon his head was
crushed with stones.

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 16:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
A girl wearing ornaments, went out at Medina. Somebody struck her with a
stone. She was brought to the Prophet while she was still alive. Allah's
Apostle asked her, "Did such-and-such a person strike you?" She raised her
head, denying that. He asked her a second time, saying, "Did so-and-so strike
you?" She raised her head, denying that. He said for the third time, "Did soand-so strike you?" She lowered her head, agreeing. Allah's Apostle then
sent for the killer and killed him between two stones.

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 17:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "The blood of a Muslim who confesses that none has
the right to be worshipped but Allah and that I am His Apostle, cannot be
shed except in three cases: In Qisas for murder, a married person who
commits illegal sexual intercourse and the one who reverts from Islam
(apostate) and leaves the Muslims."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 18:
Narrated Anas:
A Jew killed a girl so that he may steal her ornaments. He struck her with a
stone, and she was brought to the Prophet while she was still alive. The
Prophet asked her, "Did such-and-such person strike you?" She gestured
with her head, expressing denial. He asked her for the second time, and she
again gestured with her head, expressing denial. When he asked her for the
third time, she beckoned, "Yes." So the Prophet killed him (the Jew) with
two stones.

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 19:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
In the year of the Conquest of Mecca, the tribe of Khuza'a killed a man from
the tribe of Bam Laith in revenge for a killed person belonging to them in
the Pre-lslamic Period of Ignorance. So Allah's Apostle got up saying, "Allah
held back the (army having) elephants from Mecca, but He let His Apostle
and the believers overpower the infidels (of Mecca). Beware! (Mecca is a
sanctuary)! Verily! Fighting in Mecca was not permitted for anybody before
me, nor will it be permitted for anybody after me; It was permitted for me
only for a while (an hour or so) of that day. No doubt! It is at this moment a
sanctuary; its thorny shrubs should not be uprooted; its trees should not be
cut down; and its Luqata (fallen things) should not be picked up except by
the one who would look for its owner. And if somebody is killed, his closest
relative has the right to choose one of two things, i.e., either the Blood
money or retaliation by having the killer killed." Then a man from Yemen,
called Abu Shah, stood up and said, "Write that) for me, O Allah's Apostle!"
Allah's Apostle said (to his companions), "Write that for Abu Shah." Then
another man from Quraish got up, saying, "O Allah's Apostle! Except Al-
Idhkhir (a special kind of grass) as we use it in our houses and for graves."
Allah's Apostle said, "Except Al-idhkkir."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 20:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
For the children of Israel the punishment for crime was Al-Qisas only (i.e.,
the law of equality in punishment) and the payment of Blood money was
not permitted as an alternate. But Allah said to this nation (Muslims): 'O you
who believe! Qisas is prescribed for you in case of murder, .....(up to) ...end
of the Verse. (2.178)
Ibn 'Abbas added: Remission (forgiveness) in this Verse, means to accept
the Blood-money in an intentional murder. Ibn 'Abbas added: The Verse:
'Then the relatives should demand Blood-money in a reasonable manner.'
(2.178) means that the demand should be reasonable and it is to be
compensated with handsome gratitude.

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 21:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "The most hated persons to Allah are three: (1) A person
who deviates from the right conduct, i.e., an evil doer, in the Haram
(sanctuaries of Mecca and Medina); (2) a person who seeks that the
traditions of the Pre-lslamic Period of Ignorance, should remain in Islam (3)
and a person who seeks to shed somebody's blood without any right."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 22:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The pagans were defeated on the day (of the battle) of Uhud. Satan
shouted among the people on the day of Uhud, "O Allah's worshippers!
Beware of what is behind you!" So the front file of the army attacked the
back files (mistaking them for the enemy) till they killed Al-Yaman. Hudhaifa
(bin Al-Yaman) shouted, "My father!" My father! But they killed him.
Hudhaifa said, "May Allah forgive you." (The narrator added: Some of the
defeated pagans fled till they reached Taif.)

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 23:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
A Jew crushed the head of a girl between two stones. It was said to her.
"Who has done this to you, such-and-such person, such-and-such person?"
When the name of the Jew was mentioned, she nodded with her head,
agreeing. So the Jew was brought and he confessed. The Prophet ordered
that his head be crushed with the stones. (Hammam said, "with two
stones.")

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 24:
Narrated Anas bin Malik: The Prophet killed a Jew for killing a girl in order to
take her orna

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 25:
Narrated 'Aisha:
We poured medicine into the mouth of the Prophet during his ailment. He
said, "Don't pour medicine into my mouth." (We thought he said that) out
of the aversion a patient usually has for medicines. When he improved and
felt better he said, "There is none of you but will be forced to drink
medicine, except Al-'Abbas, for he did not witness your deed."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 26:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
That he heard Allah's Apostle saying, "We (Muslims) are the last (to come)
but (will be) the foremost (on the Day of Resurrection)." And added, "If
someone is peeping (looking secretly) into your house without your
permission, and you throw a stone at him and destroy his eyes, there will be
no blame on you."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 27:
Narrated Yahya:
Humaid said, "A man peeped into the house of the Prophet and the Prophet
aimed an arrow head at him to hit him." I asked, "Who told you that?" He
said, "Anas bin Malik" (See Hadith No. 258 and 259, Vol. 8)

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 28:
Narrated 'Aisha:
"When it was the day of (the battle of) Uhud, the pagans were defeated.
Then Satan shouted, "O Allah's worshipers! Beware of what is behind you!"
So the front files attacked the back files of the army. Hudhaifa looked, and
behold, there was his father, Al-Yaman (being attacked) ! He shouted (to his
companions), "O Allah's worshipers, my father, my father!" But by Allah,
they did not stop till they killed him (i.e., Hudhaifa's father). Hudhaifa said,
"May Allah forgive you." ('Urwa said, Hudhaifa continued asking Allah's
Forgiveness for the killer of his father till he died.

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 29:
Narrated Salama:
We went out with the Prophet to Khaibar. A man (from the companions)
said, "O 'Amir! Let us hear some of your Huda (camel-driving songs.)" So he
sang some of them (i.e. a lyric in harmony with the camels walk). The
Prophet said, "Who is the driver (of these camels)?" They said, "Amir." The
Prophet said, "May Allah bestow His Mercy on him !" The people said, "O
Allah's Apostle! Would that you let us enjoy his company longer!" Then 'Amir
was killed the following morning. The people said, "The good deeds of 'Amir
are lost as he has killed himself." I returned at the time while they were
talking about that. I went to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Prophet! Let
my father be sacrificed for you! The people claim that 'Amir's good deeds
are lost." The Prophet said, "Whoever says so is a liar, for 'Amir will have a
double reward as he exerted himself to obey Allah and fought in Allah's
Cause. No other way of killing would have granted him greater reward."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 30:
Narrated 'Imran bin Husain:
A man bit another man's hand and the latter pulled his hand out of his
mouth by force, causing two of his incisors (teeth) to fall out. They
submitted their case to the Prophet, who said, "One of you bit his brother as
a male camel bites. (Go away), there is no Diya (Blood-money) for you."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 31:
Narrated Ya'la:
I went out in one of the Ghazwa and a man bit another man and as a result,
an incisor tooth of the former was pulled out. The Prophet cancelled the
case.

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 32:
Narrated Anas:
The daughter of An-Nadr slapped a girl and broke her incisor tooth. They
(the relatives of that girl), came to the Prophet and he gave the order of
Qisas (equality in punishment).
Volume 9, Book 83, Number 33:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "This and this are the same." He meant the little finger
and the thumb.

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 34:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
I heard the Prophet (saying the same as above Hadith 34).

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 35:
Narrated 'Aisha:
We poured medicine into the mouth of Allah's Apostle during his illness, and
he pointed out to us intending to say, "Don't pour medicine into my mouth."
We thought that his refusal was out of the aversion a patient usually has for
medicine. When he improved and felt a bit better he said (to us.) "Didn't I
forbid you to pour medicine into my mouth?" We said, "We thought (you did
so) because of the aversion, one usually have for medicine." Allah's Apostle
said, "There is none of you but will be forced to drink medicine, and I will
watch you, except Al-'Abbas, for he did not witness this act of yours."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 36:
Narrated Sahl bin Abi Hathma:
(a man from the Ansar) that a number of people from his tribe went to
Khaibar and dispersed, and then they found one of them murdered. They
said to the people with whom the corpse had been found, "You have killed
our companion!" Those people said, "Neither have we killed him, nor do we
know his killer." The bereaved group went to the Prophet and said, "O
Allah's Apostle! We went to Khaibar and found one of us murdered." The
Prophet said, "Let the older among you come forward and speak." Then the
Prophet said, to them, "Bring your proof against the killer." They said "We
have no proof." The Prophet said, "Then they (the defendants) will take an
oath." They said, "We do not accept the oaths of the Jews." Allah's Apostle
did not like that the Blood-money of the killed one be lost without
compensation, so he paid one-hundred camels out of the camels of Zakat
(to the relatives of the deceased) as Diya (Blood-money).

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 37:
Narrated Abu Qilaba:
Once 'Umar bin 'Abdul 'Aziz sat on his throne in the courtyard of his house
so that the people might gather before him. Then he admitted them and
(when they came in), he said, "What do you think of Al-Qasama?" They said,
"We say that it is lawful to depend on Al-Qasama in Qisas, as the previous
Muslim Caliphs carried out Qisas depending on it." Then he said to me, "O
Abu Qilaba! What do you say about it?" He let me appear before the people
and I said, "O Chief of the Believers! You have the chiefs of the army staff
and the nobles of the Arabs. If fifty of them testified that a married man had
committed illegal sexual intercourse in Damascus but they had not seen him
(doing so), would you stone him?" He said, "No." I said, "If fifty of them
testified that a man had committed theft in Hums, would you cut off his
hand though they did not see him?" He replied, "No." I said, "By Allah,
Allah's Apostle never killed anyone except in one of the following three
situations: (1) A person who killed somebody unjustly, was killed (in Qisas,)
(2) a married person who committed illegal sexual intercourse and (3) a man
who fought against Allah and His Apostle and deserted Islam and became an
apostate." Then the people said, "Didn't Anas bin Malik narrate that Allah's
Apostle cut off the hands of the thieves, branded their eyes and then, threw
them in the sun?" I said, "I shall tell you the narration of Anas. Anas said:
"Eight persons from the tribe of 'Ukl came to Allah's Apostle and gave the
Pledge of allegiance for Islam (became Muslim). The climate of the place
(Medina) did not suit them, so they became sick and complained about that
to Allah's Apostle. He said (to them ), "Won't you go out with the shepherd
of our camels and drink of the camels' milk and urine (as medicine)?" They
said, "Yes." So they went out and drank the camels' milk and urine, and after
they became healthy, they killed the shepherd of Allah's Apostle and took
away all the camels. This news reached Allah's Apostle , so he sent (men) to
follow their traces and they were captured and brought (to the Prophet). He
then ordered to cut their hands and feet, and their eyes were branded with
heated pieces of iron, and then he threw them in the sun till they died." I
said, "What can be worse than what those people did? They deserted Islam,
committed murder and theft."
Then 'Anbasa bin Said said, "By Allah, I never heard a narration like this of
today." I said, "O 'Anbasa! You deny my narration?" 'Anbasa said, "No, but
you have related the narration in the way it should be related. By Allah,
these people are in welfare as long as this Sheikh (Abu Qilaba) is among
them." I added, "Indeed in this event there has been a tradition set by
Allah's Apostle. The narrator added: Some Ansari people came to the
Prophet and discussed some matters with him, a man from amongst them
went out and was murdered. Those people went out after him, and behold,
their companion was swimming in blood. They returned to Allah's Apostle
and said to him, "O Allah's Apostle, we have found our companion who had
talked with us and gone out before us, swimming in blood (killed)." Allah's
Apostle went out and asked them, "Whom do you suspect or whom do you
think has killed him?" They said, "We think that the Jews have killed him."
The Prophet sent for the Jews and asked them, "Did you kill this (person)?"
They replied, "No." He asked the Al-Ansars, "Do you agree that I let fifty
Jews take an oath that they have not killed him?" They said, "It matters little
for the Jews to kill us all and then take false oaths." He said, "Then would
you like to receive the Diya after fifty of you have taken an oath (that the
Jews have killed your man)?" They said, "We will not take the oath." Then
the Prophet himself paid them the Diya (Blood-money)." The narrator
added, "The tribe of Hudhail repudiated one of their men (for his evil
conduct) in the Pre-lslamic period of Ignorance.
Then, at a place called Al-Batha' (near Mecca), the man attacked a Yemenite
family at night to steal from them, but a. man from the family noticed him
and struck him with his sword and killed him. The tribe of Hudhail came and
captured the Yemenite and brought him to 'Umar during the Hajj season and
said, "He has killed our companion." The Yemenite said, "But these people
had repudiated him (i.e., their companion)." 'Umar said, "Let fifty persons of
Hudhail swear that they had not repudiated him." So forty-nine of them
took the oath and then a person belonging to them, came from Sham and
they requested him to swear similarly, but he paid one-thousand Dirhams
instead of taking the oath. They called another man instead of him and the
new man shook hands with the brother of the deceased. Some people said,
"We and those fifty men who had taken false oaths (Al-Qasama) set out, and
when they reached a place called Nakhlah, it started raining so they entered
a cave in the mountain, and the cave collapsed on those fifty men who took
the false oath, and all of them died except the two persons who had shaken
hands with each other. They escaped death but a stone fell on the leg of the
brother of the deceased and broke it, whereupon he survived for one year
and then died." I further said, "'Abdul Malik bin Marwan sentenced a man to
death in Qisas (equality in punishment) for murder, basing his judgment on
Al-Qasama, but later on he regretted that judgment and ordered that the
names of the fifty persons who had taken the oath (Al-Qasama), be erased
from the register, and he exiled them in Sham."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 38a:
Narrated Anas:
A man peeped into one of the dwelling places of the Prophet. The Prophet
got up and aimed a sharp-edged arrow head (or wooden stick) at him to
poke him stealthily.

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 38:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd As-Sa'idi:
A man peeped through a hole in the door of Allah's Apostle's house, and at
that time, Allah's Apostle had a Midri (an iron comb or bar) with which he
was rubbing his head. So when Allah's Apostle saw him, he said (to him), "If
I had been sure that you were looking at me (through the door), I would
have poked your eye with this (sharp iron bar)." Allah's Apostle added, "The
asking for permission to enter has been enjoined so that one may not look
unlawfully (at what there is in the house without the permission of its
people)."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 39:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Abul Qasim said, "If any person peeps at you without your permission and
you poke him with a stick and injure his eye, you will not be blamed."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 40:
Narrated Ash-Sha'bi:
liever." (See Hadith No. 283,Vol. 4)

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 41:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Two women from the tribe of Hudhail (fought with each other) and one of
them threw (a stone at) the other, causing her to have a miscarriage and
Allah's Apostle gave his verdict that the killer (of the fetus) should give a
male or female slave (as a Diya).

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 42e:
Narrated Hisham's father from Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba:
'Umar consulted the companions about the case of a woman's abortion
(caused by somebody else). Al-Mughlra said: The Prophet gave the verdict
that a male or female slave should be given (as a Diya). Then Muhammad bin
Maslama testified that he had witnessed the Prophet giving such a verdict.

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 42:
Narrated Hisham's father:
'Umar asked the people, "Who heard the Prophet giving his verdict
regarding abortions?" Al-Mughira said, "I heard him judging that a male or
female slave should be given (as a Diya)." 'Umar said, "Present a witness to
testify your statement." Muhammad bin Maslama said, "I testify that the
Prophet gave such a judgment."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 43:
Narrated 'Urwa:
I heard Al-Maghira bin Shu'ba narrating that 'Umar had consulted them
about the case of abortion (similarly as narrated in No. 42).

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 44:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle gave a verdict regarding an aborted fetus of a woman from
Bani Lihyan that the killer (of the fetus) should give a male or female slave
(as a Diya) but the woman who was required to give the slave, died, so
Allah's Apostle gave the verdict that her inheritance be given to her children
and her husband and the Diya be paid by her 'Asaba.

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 45:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Two women from Hudhail fought with each other and one of them hit the
other with a stone that killed her and what was in her womb. The relatives
of the killer and the relatives of the victim submitted their case to the
Prophet who judged that the Diya for the fetus was a male or female slave,
and the Diya for the killed woman was to be paid by the 'Asaba (near
relatives) of the killer.

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 46:
Narrated 'Abdul-'Aziz:
Anas said, "When Allah's Apostle arrived at Medina, Abu Talha took hold of
my hand and brought me to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle!
Anas is an intelligent boy, so let him serve you." Anas added, "So I served
the Prophet L at home and on journeys; by Allah, he never said to me for
anything which I did: Why have you done this like this or, for anything which
I did not do: 'Why have you not done this like this?"

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 47:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "There is no Diya for persons killed by animals or for the
one who has been killed accidentally by falling into a well or for the one
killed in a mine. And one-fifth of Rikaz (treasures buried before the Islamic
era) is to be given to the state."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 48:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "There is no Diya for a person injured or killed by an animal
(going about without somebody to control it) and similarly, there is no Diya
for the one who falls and dies in a well, and also the one who dies in a mine.
As regards the Ar-Rikaz (buried wealth), one-fifth thereof is for the state."
Volume 9, Book 83, Number 49:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
The Prophet said, "Whoever killed a Mu'ahid (a person who is granted the
pledge of protection by the Muslims) shall not smell the fragrance of
Paradise though its fragrance can be smelt at a distance of forty years (of
traveling)."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 50:
Narrated Abu Juhaifa:
I asked 'Ali "Do you have anything Divine literature besides what is in the
Qur'an?" Or, as Uyaina once said, "Apart from what the people have?" 'Ali
said, "By Him Who made the grain split (germinate) and created the soul, we
have nothing except what is in the Quran and the ability (gift) of
understanding Allah's Book which He may endow a man, with and what is
written in this sheet of paper." I asked, "What is on this paper?" He replied,
"The legal regulations of Diya (Blood-money) and the (ransom for) releasing
of the captives, and the judgment that no Muslim should be killed in Qisas
(equality in punishment) for killing a Kafir (disbeliever)."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 51:
Narrated Abu Said:
The Prophet said, "Do not prefer some prophets to others."

Volume 9, Book 83, Number 52:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
A Jew whose face had been slapped (by someone), came to the Prophet
and said, "O Muhammad! A man from your Ansari companions slapped me. 
The Prophet said, "Call him". They called him and the Prophet asked him,
"Why did you slap his face?" He said, "O Allah's Apostle! While I was passing
by the Jews, I heard him saying, 'By Him Who chose Moses above all the
human beings.' I said (protestingly), 'Even above Muhammad?' So I became
furious and slapped him." The Prophet said, "Do not give me preference to
other prophets, for the people will become unconscious on the Day of
Resurrection and I will be the first to gain conscious, and behold, I will Find
Moses holding one of the pillars of the Throne (of Allah). Then I will not
know whether he has become conscious before me or he has been
exempted because of his unconsciousness at the mountain (during his
worldly life) which he received."
BOOK 84. DEALING WITH APOSTATES (53-72)
Volume 9, Book 84, Number 53:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
When the Verse: 'It is those who believe and confuse not their belief with
wrong (i.e., worshipping others besides Allah): (6.82) was revealed, it
became very hard on the companions of the Prophet and they said, "Who
among us has not confused his belief with wrong (oppression)?" On that,
Allah's Apostle said, "This is not meant (by the Verse). Don't you listen to
Luqman's statement: 'Verily! Joining others in worship with Allah is a great
wrong indeed.' (31.13)

Volume 9, Book 84, Number 54:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
The Prophet. said, "The biggest of the great sins are: To join others in
worship with Allah, to be undutiful to one's parents, and to give a false
witness." He repeated it thrice, or said, "....a false statement," and kept on
repeating that warning till we wished he would stop saying it. (See Hadith
No.7, Vol. 8)

Volume 9, Book 84, Number 55:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
A bedouin came to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! What are the
biggest sins?: The Prophet said, "To join others in worship with Allah." The
bedouin said, "What is next?" The Prophet said, "To be undutiful to one's
parents." The bedouin said "What is next?" The Prophet said "To take an
oath 'Al-Ghamus." The bedouin said, "What is an oath 'Al-Ghamus'?" The
Prophet said, "The false oath through which one deprives a Muslim of his
property (unjustly)."
Volume 9, Book 84, Number 56:
Narrated Ibn Mas'ud:
A man said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall we be punished for what we did in the
Prelslamic Period of ignorance?" The Prophet said, "Whoever does good in
Islam will not be punished for what he did in the Pre-lslamic Period of
ignorance and whoever does evil in Islam will be punished for his former and
later (bad deeds)."

Volume 9, Book 84, Number 57:
Narrated 'Ikrima:
Some Zanadiqa (atheists) were brought to 'Ali and he burnt them. The news
of this event, reached Ibn 'Abbas who said, "If I had been in his place, I
would not have burnt them, as Allah's Apostle forbade it, saying, 'Do not
punish anybody with Allah's punishment (fire).' I would have killed them
according to the statement of Allah's Apostle, 'Whoever changed his Islamic
religion, then kill him.'"

Volume 9, Book 84, Number 58:
Narrated Abu Burda:
Abu Musa said, "I came to the Prophet along with two men (from the tribe)
of Ash'ariyin, one on my right and the other on my left, while Allah's Apostle
was brushing his teeth (with a Siwak), and both men asked him for some
employment. The Prophet said, 'O Abu Musa (O 'Abdullah bin Qais!).' I said,
'By Him Who sent you with the Truth, these two men did not tell me what
was in their hearts and I did not feel (realize) that they were seeking
employment.' As if I were looking now at his Siwak being drawn to a corner
under his lips, and he said, 'We never (or, we do not) appoint for our affairs
anyone who seeks to be employed. But O Abu Musa! (or 'Abdullah bin Qais!)
Go to Yemen.'" The Prophet then sent Mu'adh bin Jabal after him and when
Mu'adh reached him, he spread out a cushion for him and requested him to
get down (and sit on the cushion). Behold: There was a fettered man beside
Abu Muisa. Mu'adh asked, "Who is this (man)?" Abu Muisa said, "He was a
Jew and became a Muslim and then reverted back to Judaism." Then Abu
Muisa requested Mu'adh to sit down but Mu'adh said, "I will not sit down till
he has been killed. This is the judgment of Allah and His Apostle (for such
cases) and repeated it thrice. Then Abu Musa ordered that the man be killed,
and he was killed. Abu Musa added, "Then we discussed the night prayers
and one of us said, 'I pray and sleep, and I hope that Allah will reward me for
my sleep as well as for my prayers.'"

Volume 9, Book 84, Number 59:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
When the Prophet died and Abu Bakr became his successor and some of the
Arabs reverted to disbelief, 'Umar said, "O Abu Bakr! How can you fight
these people although Allah's Apostle said, 'I have been ordered to fight the
people till they say: 'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah, 'and
whoever said, 'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah', Allah will
save his property and his life from me, unless (he does something for which
he receives legal punishment) justly, and his account will be with Allah?'
"Abu Bakr said, "By Allah! I will fight whoever differentiates between
prayers and Zakat as Zakat is the right to be taken from property (according
to Allah's Orders). By Allah! If they refused to pay me even a kid they used to
pay to Allah's Apostle, I would fight with them for withholding it." 'Umar
said, "By Allah: It was nothing, but I noticed that Allah opened Abu Bakr's
chest towards the decision to fight, therefore I realized that his decision was
right."

Volume 9, Book 84, Number 60:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
A Jew passed by Allah's Apostle and said, "As-Samu 'Alaika." Allah's Apostle
said in reply, "We 'Alaika." Allah's Apostle then said to his companions, "Do
you know what he (the Jew) has said? He said, 'As-Samu 'Alaika.'" They said,
"O Allah's Apostle! Shall we kill him?" The Prophet, said, "No. When the
people of the Book greet you, say: 'Wa 'Alaikum.'"

Volume 9, Book 84, Number 61:
Narrated 'Aisha:
A group of Jews asked permission to visit the Prophet (and when they were
admitted) they said, "As-Samu 'Alaika (Death be upon you)." I said (to
them), "But death and the curse of Allah be upon you!" The Prophet said, "O
'Aisha! Allah is kind and lenient and likes that one should be kind and lenient
in all matters." I said, "Haven't you heard what they said?" He said, "I said (to
them), 'Wa 'Alaikum (and upon you).

Volume 9, Book 84, Number 62:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "When the Jews greet anyone of you they say:
'Sam'Alaika (death be upon you); so you should say; 'Wa 'Alaika (and upon
you).'"

Volume 9, Book 84, Number 63:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
As if I am looking at the Prophet while he was speaking about one of the
prophets whose people have beaten and wounded him, and he was wiping
the blood off his face and saying, "O Lord! Forgive my, people as they do not
know."
Volume 9, Book 84, Number 64:
Narrated 'Ali:
Whenever I tell you a narration from Allah's Apostle, by Allah, I would rather
fall down from the sky than ascribe a false statement to him, but if I tell you
something between me and you (not a Hadith) then it was indeed a trick
(i.e., I may say things just to cheat my enemy). No doubt I heard Allah's
Apostle saying, "During the last days there will appear some young foolish
people who will say the best words but their faith will not go beyond their
throats (i.e. they will have no faith) and will go out from (leave) their religion
as an arrow goes out of the game. So, where-ever you find them, kill them,
for who-ever kills them shall have reward on the Day of Resurrection."

Volume 9, Book 84, Number 65:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Yasar:
That they visited Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri and asked him about Al-Harauriyya, a
special unorthodox religious sect, "Did you hear the Prophet saying anything
about them?" Abu Sa'id said, "I do not know what Al-Harauriyya is, but I
heard the Prophet saying, "There will appear in this nation---- he did not say:
From this nation ---- a group of people so pious apparently that you will
consider your prayers inferior to their prayers, but they will recite the Quran,
the teachings of which will not go beyond their throats and will go out of
their religion as an arrow darts through the game, whereupon the archer
may look at his arrow, its Nasl at its Risaf and its Fuqa to see whether it is
blood-stained or not (i.e. they will have not even a trace of Islam in them)."

Volume 9, Book 84, Number 66:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Regarding Al-Harauriyya: The Prophet said, "They will go out of Islam as an
arrow darts out of the game's body.'
Volume 9, Book 84, Number 67:
Narrated Abu Sa'id:
While the Prophet was distributing (something, 'Abdullah bin Dhil
Khawaisira At-Tamimi came and said, "Be just, O Allah's Apostle!" The
Prophet said, "Woe to you ! Who would be just if I were not?" 'Umar bin AlKhattab said, "Allow me to cut off his neck ! " The Prophet said, " Leave him,
for he has companions, and if you compare your prayers with their prayers
and your fasting with theirs, you will look down upon your prayers and
fasting, in comparison to theirs. Yet they will go out of the religion as an
arrow darts through the game's body in which case, if the Qudhadh of the
arrow is examined, nothing will be found on it, and when its Nasl is
examined, nothing will be found on it; and then its Nadiyi is examined,
nothing will be found on it. The arrow has been too fast to be smeared by
dung and blood. The sign by which these people will be recognized will be a
man whose one hand (or breast) will be like the breast of a woman (or like a
moving piece of flesh). These people will appear when there will be
differences among the people (Muslims)." Abu Sa'id added: I testify that I
heard this from the Prophet and also testify that 'Ali killed those people
while I was with him. The man with the description given by the Prophet
was brought to 'Ali. The following Verses were revealed in connection with
that very person (i.e., 'Abdullah bin Dhil-Khawaisira At-Tarnimi): 'And among
them are men who accuse you (O Muhammad) in the matter of (the
distribution of) the alms.' (9.58)

Volume 9, Book 84, Number 68:
Narrated Yusair bin 'Amr:
I asked Sahl bin Hunaif, "Did you hear the Prophet saying anything about AlKhawarij?" He said, "I heard him saying while pointing his hand towards Iraq.
"There will appear in it (i.e, Iraq) some people who will recite the Quran but
it will not go beyond their throats, and they will go out from (leave) Islam as
an arrow darts through the game's body.' "
Volume 9, Book 84, Number 69:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The Hour will not be established till two (huge) groups
fight against each other, their claim being one and the same."

Volume 9, Book 84, Number 70:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
When the Verse:--'Those who believe and did not confuse their belief with
wrong (worshipping others besides Allah).' (6.82) was revealed, it was hard
on the companions of the Prophet and they said, "Who among us has not
wronged (oppressed) himself?" Allah's Apostle said, "The meaning of the
Verse is not as you think, but it is as Luqman said to his son, 'O my son! Join
not in worship others with Allah, Verily! Joining others in worship with Allah
is a great wrong indeed.'" (31.13)

Volume 9, Book 84, Number 71:
Narrated 'Itban bin Malik:
Once Allah's Apostle came to me in the morning, and a man among us said,
"Where is Malik bin Ad-Dukhshun?" Another man from us replied, "He is a
hypocrite who does not love Allah and His Apostle." The Prophet said,
"Don't you think that he says: None has the right to be worshipped but
Allah, only for Allah's sake?" They replied, "Yes" The Prophet said, "Nobody
will meet Allah with that saying on the Day of Resurrection, but Allah will
save him from the Fire."

Volume 9, Book 84, Number 72:
Narrated :
Abu 'Abdur-Rahman and Hibban bin 'Atiyya had a dispute. Abu 'AbdurRahman said to Hibban, "You know what made your companions (i.e. Ali)
dare to shed blood." Hibban said, "Come on! What is that?" 'Abdur-Rahman
said, "Something I heard him saying." The other said, "What was it?"
'AbdurRahman said, "'Ali said, Allah's Apostle sent for me, Az-Zubair and
Abu Marthad, and all of us were cavalry men, and said, 'Proceed to RaudatHajj (Abu Salama said that Abu 'Awana called it like this, i.e., Hajj where
there is a woman carrying a letter from Hatib bin Abi Balta'a to the pagans
(of Mecca). So bring that letter to me.' So we proceeded riding on our
horses till we overtook her at the same place of which Allah's Apostle had
told us. She was traveling on her camel. In that letter Hatib had written to
the Meccans about the proposed attached of Allah's Apostle against them.
We asked her, "Where is the letter which is with you?' She replied, 'I haven't
got any letter.' So we made her camel kneel down and searched her
luggage, but we did not find anything. My two companions said, 'We do not
think that she has got a letter.' I said, 'We know that Allah's Apostle has not
told a lie.'"
Then 'Ali took an oath saying, "By Him by Whom one should swear! You shall
either bring out the letter or we shall strip off your clothes." She then
stretched out her hand for her girdle (round her waist) and brought out the
paper (letter). They took the letter to Allah's Apostle. 'Umar said, "O Allah's
Apostle! (Hatib) has betrayed Allah, His Apostle and the believers; let me
chop off his neck!" Allah's Apostle said, "O Hatib! What obliged you to do
what you have done?" Hatib replied, "O Allah's Apostle! Why (for what
reason) should I not believe in Allah and His Apostle? But I intended to do
the (Mecca) people a favor by virtue of which my family and property may
be protected as there is none of your companions but has some of his
people (relatives) whom Allah urges to protect his family and property." The
Prophet said, "He has said the truth; therefore, do not say anything to him
except good." 'Umar again said, "O Allah's Apostle! He has betrayed Allah,
His Apostle and the believers; let me chop his neck off!" The Prophet said,
"Isn't he from those who fought the battle of Badr? And what do you know,
Allah might have looked at them (Badr warriors) and said (to them), 'Do
what you like, for I have granted you Paradise?' " On that, 'Umar's eyes
became flooded with tears and he said, "Allah and His Apostle know best."


BOOK 85. SAYING SOMETHING UNDER COMPULSION (IKRAAH) (73-84)
Volume 9, Book 85, Number 73:
Narrated Abi Huraira:
The Prophet used to invoke Allah in his prayer, "O Allah! Save 'Aiyash bin Abi
Rabi'a and Salama bin Hisham and Al-Walid bin Al-Walid; O Allah! Save the
weak among the believers; O Allah! Be hard upon the tribe of Mudar and
inflict years (of famine) upon them like the (famine) years of Joseph."

Volume 9, Book 85, Number 74:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever possesses the (following) three qualities will
have the sweetness of faith (1): The one to whom Allah and His Apostle
becomes dearer than anything else; (2) Who loves a person and he loves him
only for Allah's Sake; (3) who hates to revert to atheism (disbelief) as he
hates to be thrown into the Fire."

Volume 9, Book 85, Number 75:
Narrated Qais:
I heard Sa'id bin Zaid saying, "I have seen myself tied and forced by 'Umar to
leave Islam (Before 'Umar himself embraced Islam). And if the mountain of
Uhud were to collapse for the evil which you people had done to 'Uthman,
then Uhud would have the right to do so." (See Hadith No. 202, Vol. 5)

Volume 9, Book 85, Number 76:
Narrated Khabbab bin Al-Art:
We complained to Allah's Apostle (about our state) while he was leaning
against his sheet cloak in the shade of the Ka'ba. We said, "Will you ask Allah
to help us? Will you invoke Allah for us?" He said, "Among those who were
before you a (believer) used to be seized and, a pit used to be dug for him
and then he used to be placed in it. Then a saw used to be brought and put
on his head which would be split into two halves. His flesh might be combed
with iron combs and removed from his bones, yet, all that did not cause him
to revert from his religion. By Allah! This religion (Islam) will be completed
(and triumph) till a rider (traveler) goes from San'a' (the capital of Yemen)
to Hadramout fearing nobody except Allah and the wolf lest it should
trouble his sheep, but you are impatient." (See Hadith No. 191, Vol. 5)

Volume 9, Book 85, Number 77:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
While we were in the mosque, Allah's Apostle came out to us and said, "Let
us proceed to the Jews." So we went along with him till we reached Bait-alMidras (a place where the Torah used to be recited and all the Jews of the
town used to gather). The Prophet stood up and addressed them, "O
Assembly of Jews! Embrace Islam and you will be safe!" The Jews replied, "O
Aba-l-Qasim! You have conveyed Allah's message to us." The Prophet said,
"That is what I want (from you)." He repeated his first statement for the
second time, and they said, "You have conveyed Allah's message, O Aba-lQasim." Then he said it for the third time and added, "You should Know that
the earth belongs to Allah and His Apostle, and I want to exile you fro,,, this
land, so whoever among you owns some property, can sell it, otherwise you
should know that the Earth belongs to Allah and His Apostle." (See Hadith
No. 392, Vol. 4)

Volume 9, Book 85, Number 78:
Narrated Khansa' bint Khidam Al-Ansariya:
That her father gave her in marriage when she was a matron and she
disliked that marriage. So she came and (complained) to the Prophets and
he declared that marriage invalid. (See Hadith No. 69, Vol. 7)

Volume 9, Book 85, Number 79:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I asked the Prophet, "O Allah's Apostle! Should the women be asked for
their consent to their marriage?" He said, "Yes." I said, "A virgin, if asked,
feels shy and keeps quiet." He said, "Her silence means her consent."

Volume 9, Book 85, Number 80:
Narrated Jabir:
A man from the Ansar made his slave, a Mudabbar. And apart from that
slave he did not have any other property. This news reached Allah's Apostle
and he said, "Who will buy that slave from me?" So Nu'aim bin An-Nahham
bought him for 800 Dirham. Jabir added: It was a coptic (Egyptian) slave
who died that year.

Volume 9, Book 85, Number 81:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
wished, for they had more right to dispose of her than her own relativ

Volume 9, Book 85, Number 82:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "(The Prophet) Abraham migrated with his wife Sarah
till he reached a town where there was a king or a tyrant who sent a
message, to Abraham, ordering him to send Sarah to him. So when Abraham
had sent Sarah, the tyrant got up, intending to do evil with her, but she got
up and performed ablution and prayed and said, 'O Allah ! If I have believed
in You and in Your Apostle, then do not empower this oppressor over me.'
So he (the king) had an epileptic fit and started moving his legs violently. "

Volume 9, Book 85, Number 83:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "A Muslim is a brother of another Muslim. So he should
neither oppress him nor hand him over to an oppressor. And whoever
fulfilled the needs of his brother, Allah will fulfill his needs."

Volume 9, Book 85, Number 84:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle said, "Help your brother whether he is an oppressor or an
oppressed," A man said, "O Allah's Apostle! I will help him if he is oppressed,
but if he is an oppressor, how shall I help him?" The Prophet said, "By
preventing him from oppressing (others), for that is how to help him."
BOOK 86. TRICKS (85-110)
Volume 9, Book 86, Number 85:
Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:
The Prophet said, 'O people! The reward of deeds depends upon the
intentions, and every person will get the reward according to what he has
intended. So, whoever emigrated for Allah and His Apostle, then his
emigration was for Allah and His Apostle, and whoever emigrated to take
worldly benefit or for a woman to marry, then his emigration was for what
he emigrated for."

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 86:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah does not accept prayer of anyone of you if he does
Hadath (passes wind) till he performs the ablution (anew)."

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 87:
Narrated Anas:
That Abu Bakr wrote for him, Zakat regulations which Allah's Apostle had
made compulsory, and wrote that one should neither collect various
portions (of the property) nor divide the property into various portions in
order to avoid paying Zakat.

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 88:
Narrated Talha bin 'Ubaidullah:
A bedouin with unkempt hair came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Tell me what Allah has enjoined on me as regards prayers." The
Prophet said, "You have to offer perfectly the five (compulsory) prayers in a
day and a night (24 hrs.), except if you want to perform some extra optional
prayers." The bedouin said, "Tell me what Allah has enjoined on me as
regards fasting." The Prophet said, "You have to observe fast during the
month of Ramadan except if you fast some extra optional fast." The
bedouin said, "Tell me what Allah has enjoined on me as regard Zakat." The
Prophet then told him the Islamic laws and regulations whereupon the
bedouin said, "By Him Who has honored you, I will not perform any optional
deeds of worship and I will not leave anything of what Allah has enjoined on
me." Allah's Apostle said, "He will be successful if he has told the truth (or
he will enter Paradise if he said the truth)." And some people said, "The
Zakat for one-hundred and twenty camels is two Hiqqas, and if the Zakat
payer slaughters the camels intentionally or gives them as a present or plays
some other trick in order to avoid the Zakat, then there is no harm (in it) for
him.

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 89:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "On the Day of Resurrection the Kanz (Treasure or
wealth of which, Zakat has not been paid) of anyone of you will appear in
the shape of a huge bald headed poisonous male snake and its owner will
run away from it, but it will follow him and say, 'I am your Kanz.'" The
Prophet added, "By Allah, that snake will keep on following him until he
stretches out his hand and let the snake swallow it." Allah's Apostle added,
"If the owner of camels does not pay their Zakat, then, on the Day of
Resurrection those camels will come to him and will strike his face with their
hooves." Some people said: Concerning a man who has camels, and is afraid
that Zakat will be due so he sells those camels for similar camels or for
sheep or cows or money one day before Zakat becomes due in order to
avoid payment of their Zakat cunningly! "He has not to pay anything." The
same scholar said, "If one pays Zakat of his camels one day or one year prior
to the end of the year (by the end of which Zakat becomes due), his Zakat
will be valid."
Volume 9, Book 86, Number 90t:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Sa'd bin 'Ubada Al-Ansari sought the verdict of Allah's Apostle regarding a
vow made by his mother who had died before fulfilling it. Allah's Apostle
said, "Fulfill it on her behalf." Some people said, "If the number of camels
reaches twenty, then their owner has to pay four sheep as Zakat; and if their
owner gives them as a gift or sells them in order to escape the payment of
Zakat cunningly before the completion of a year, then he is not to pay
anything, and if he slaughters them and then dies, then no Zakat is to be
taken from his property."

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 90:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
Nafi narrated to me that 'Abdullah said that Allah's Apostle forbade the
Shighar. I asked Nafi', "What is the Shighar?" He said, "It is to marry the
daughter of a man and marry one's daughter to that man (at the same time)
without Mahr (in both cases); or to marry the sister of a man and marry
one's own sister to that man without Mahr." Some people said, "If one, by a
trick, marries on the basis of Shighar, the marriage is valid but its condition is
illegal." The same scholar said regarding Al-Mut'a, "The marriage is invalid
and its condition is illegal." Some others said, "The Mut'a and the Shighar
are permissible but the condition is illegal."

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 91:
Narrated Muhammad bin 'Ali:
'Ali was told that Ibn 'Abbas did not see any harm in the Mut'a marriage. 'Ali
said, "Allah's Apostle forbade the Mut'a marriage on the Day of the battle of
Khaibar and he forbade the eating of donkey's meat." Some people said, "If
one, by a tricky way, marries temporarily, his marriage is illegal." Others said,
"The marriage is valid but its condition is illegal."

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 92:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "One should not prevent others from watering their
animals with the surplus of his water in order to prevent them from
benefiting by the surplus of grass."

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 93:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle forbade the practice of An-Najsh.

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 94:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
A man mentioned to the Prophet that he had always been cheated in
bargains. The Prophet said, "Whenever you do bargain, say, 'No cheating.'"

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 95:
Narrated 'Urwa:
That he asked 'Aisha regarding the Verse: 'If you fear that you shall not be
able to deal justly with the orphan girls, marry (other) women of your
choice.' (4.3) 'Aisha said, "It is about an orphan girl under the custody of her
guardian who being attracted by her wealth and beauty wants to marry her
with Mahr less than other women of her status. So such guardians were
forbidden to marry them unless they treat them justly by giving them their
full Mahr. Then the people sought the verdict of Allah's Apostle for such
cases, whereupon Allah revealed: 'They ask your instruction concerning
women..' (4.127) (The sub-narrator then mentioned the Hadith.)

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 96:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "For every betrayer there will be a flag by which he will be
recognized on the Day of Resurrection. "

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 97:
Narrated Um Salama:
The Prophet said, "I am only a human being, and you people have disputes.
May be some one amongst you can present his case in a more eloquent and
convincing manner than the other, and I give my judgment in his favor
according to what I hear. Beware! If ever I give (by error) somebody
something of his brother's right then he should not take it as I have only,
given him a piece of Fire." (See Hadith No. 638. Vol. 3)

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 98:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "A virgin should not be married till she is asked for her
consent; and the matron should not be married till she is asked whether she
agrees to marry or not." It was asked, "O Allah's Apostle! How will she(the
virgin) express her consent?" He said, "By keeping silent." Some people said,
"If a virgin is not asked for her consent and she is not married, and then a
man, by playing a trick presents two false witnesses that he has married her
with her consent and the judge confirms his marriage as a true one, and the
husband knows that the witnesses were false ones, then there is no harm
for him to consummate his marriage with her and the marriage is regarded
as valid."
Volume 9, Book 86, Number 99:
Narrated Al-Qasim:
A woman from the offspring of Ja'far was afraid lest her guardian marry her
(to somebody) against her will. So she sent for two elderly men from the
Ansar, 'AbdurRahman and Mujammi', the two sons of Jariya, and they said
to her, "Don't be afraid, for Khansa' bint Khidam was given by her father in
marriage against her will, then the Prophet cancelled that marriage." (See
Hadith No. 78)

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 100:
Narrated Abu Haraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "A lady slave should not be given in marriage until she is
consulted, and a virgin should not be given in marriage until her permission
is granted." The people said, "How will she express her permission?" The
Prophet said, "By keeping silent (when asked her consent)." Some people
said, "If a man, by playing a trick, presents two false witnesses before the
judge to testify that he has married a matron with her consent and the judge
confirms his marriage, and the husband is sure that he has never married her
(before), then such a marriage will be considered as a legal one and he may
live with her as husband."

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 101:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said, "It is essential to have the consent of a virgin (for the
marriage). I said, "A virgin feels shy." The Prophet; said, "Her silence means
her consent." Some people said, "If a man falls in love with an orphan slave
girl or a virgin and she refuses (him) and then he makes a trick by bringing
two false witnesses to testify that he has married her, and then she attains
the age of puberty and agrees to marry him and the judge accepts the false
witness and the husband knows that the witnesses were false ones, he may
consummate his marriage."

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 102:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle used to like sweets and also used to like honey, and
whenever he finished the 'Asr prayer, he used to visit his wives and stay with
them. Once he visited Hafsa and remained with her longer than the period
he used to stay, so I enquired about it. It was said to me, "A woman from
her tribe gave her a leather skin containing honey as a present, and she gave
some of it to Allah's Apostle to drink." I said, "By Allah, we will play a trick on
him." So I mentioned the story to Sauda (the wife of the Prophet) and said
to her, "When he enters upon you, he will come near to you whereupon you
should say to him, 'O Allah's Apostle! Have you eaten Maghafir?' He will say,
'No.' Then you say to him, 'What is this bad smell? ' And it would be very
hard on Allah's Apostle that a bad smell should be found on his body. He will
say, 'Hafsa has given me a drink of honey.' Then you should say to him, 'Its
bees must have sucked from the Al-'Urfut (a foul smelling flower).' I too, will
tell him the same. And you, O Saifya, say the same."
So when the Prophet entered upon Sauda (the following happened). Sauda
said, "By Him except Whom none has the right to be worshipped, I was
about to say to him what you had told me to say while he was still at the
gate because of fear from you. But when Allah 's Apostle came near to me, I
said to him, 'O Allah's Apostle! Have you eaten Maghafir?' He replied, 'No.' I
said, 'What about this smell?' He said, 'Hafsa has given me a drink of honey.'
I said, 'Its bees must have sucked Al-'Urfut.' " When he entered upon me, I
told him the same as that, and when he entered upon Safiya, she too told
him the same. So when he visited Hafsa again, she said to him, "O Allah's
Apostle! Shall I give you a drink of it (honey)?" He said, "I have no desire for
it." Sauda said, Subhan Allah! We have deprived him of it (honey)." I said to
her, "Be quiet!"
Volume 9, Book 86, Number 103:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amir bin Rabi'a:
'Umar bin Al-Khattab left for Sham, and when he reached a placed called
Sargh, he came to know that there was an outbreak of an epidemic (of
plague) in Sham. Then 'AbdurRahman bin 'Auf told him that Allah's Apostle
said, "If you hear the news of an outbreak of an epidemic (plague) in a
certain place, do not enter that place: and if the epidemic falls in a place
while you are present in it, do not leave that place to escape from the
epidemic." So 'Umar returned from Sargh.

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 104:
Narrated 'Amir bin Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas:
That he heard Usama bin Zaid speaking to Sa'd, saying, "Allah's Apostle
mentioned the plague and said, 'It is a means of punishment with which
some nations were punished and some of it has remained, and it appears
now and then. So whoever hears that there is an outbreak of plague in some
land, he should not go to that land, and if the plague breaks out in the land
where one is already present, one should not run away from that land,
escaping from the plague."

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 105:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "The one who takes back his gift is like a dog swallowing
its own vomit, and we (believers) should not act according to this bad
example."

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 106:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet has decreed that preemption is valid in all cases where the real
estate concerned has not been divided, but if the boundaries are established
and the ways are made, then there is no preemption. A man said,
"Preemption is only for the neighbor," and then he makes invalid what he
has confirmed. He said, "If someone wants to buy a house and being afraid
that the neighbor (of the house) may buy it through preemption, he buys
one share out of one hundred shares of the house and then buys the rest of
the house, then the neighbor can only have the right of preemption for the
first share but not for the rest of the house; and the buyer may play such a
trick in this case."

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 107:
Narrated 'Amr bin Ash-Sharid:
Al-Miswar bin Makhrama came and put his hand on my shoulder and I
accompanied him to Sa'd. Abu Rafi' said to Al-Miswar, "Won't you order this
(i.e. Sa'd) to buy my house which is in my yard?" Sa'd said, "I will not offer
more than four hundred in installments over a fixed period." Abu Rafi said,
"I was offered five hundred cash but I refused. Had I not heard the Prophet
saying, 'A neighbor is more entitled to receive the care of his neighbor,' I
would not have sold it to you." The narrator said, to Sufyan: Ma'mar did not
say so. Sufyan said, "But he did say so to me." Some people said, "If
someone wants to sell a house and deprived somebody of the right of
preemption, he has the right to play a trick to render the preemption invalid.
And that is by giving the house to the buyer as a present and marking its
boundaries and giving it to him. The buyer then gives the seller onethousand Dirham as compensation in which case the preemptor loses his
right of preemption."
Narrated 'Amr bin Ash-Sharid: Abu Rafi' said that Sa'd offered him four
hundred Mithqal of gold for a house. Abu Rafi ' said, "If I had not heard
Allah's Apostle saying, 'A neighbor has more right to be taken care of by his
neighbor,' then I would not have given it to you." Some people said, "If one
has bought a portion of a house and wants to cancel the right of
preemption, he may give it as a present to his little son and he will not be
obliged to take an oath."

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 108:
Narrated Abu Humaid As-Sa'idi:
Allah's Apostle appointed a man called Ibn Al-Lutabiyya to collect the Zakat
from Bani Sulaim's tribe. When he returned, the Prophet called him to
account. He said (to the Prophet, 'This is your money, and this has been
given to me as a gift." On that, Allah's Apostle said, "Why didn't you stay in
your father's and mother's house to see whether you will be given gifts or
not if you are telling the truth?" Then the Prophet addressed us, and after
praising and glorifying Allah, he said: "Amma Ba'du", I employ a man from
among you to manage some affair of what Allah has put under my custody,
and then he comes to me and says, 'This is your money and this has been
given to me as a gift. Why didn't he stay in his father's and mother's home to
see whether he will be given gifts or not? By Allah, not anyone of you takes a
thing unlawfully but he will meet Allah on the Day of Resurrection, carrying
that thing. I do not want to see any of you carrying a grunting camel or a
mooing cow or a bleating sheep on meeting Allah." Then the Prophet raised
both his hands till the whiteness of his armpits became visible, and he said,
"O Allah! Haven't I have conveyed (Your Message)?" The narrator added: My
eyes witnessed and my ears heard (that Hadith).

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 109:
Narrated Abu Rafi':
The Prophet said, "The neighbor has more right to be taken care of by his
neighbor (than anyone else)." Some men said, "If one wants to buy a house
for 20,000 Dirhams then there is no harm to play a trick to deprive
somebody of preemption by buying it (just on paper) with 20,000 Dirhams
but paying to the seller only 9,999 Dirhams in cash and then agree with the
seller to pay only one Dinar in cash for the rest of the price (i.e. 10,001
Dirhams). If the preemptor offers 20,000 Dirhams for the house, he can buy
it otherwise he has no right to buy it (by this trick he got out of preemption).
If the house proves to belong to somebody else other than the seller, the
buyer should take back from the seller what he has paid, i.e., 9,999 Dirhams
and one Dinar, because if the house proves to belong to somebody else, so
the whole bargain (deal) is unlawful. If the buyer finds a defect in the house
and it does not belong to somebody other than the seller, the buyer may
return it and receive 20,000 Dirhams (instead of 9999 Dirham plus one
Dinar) which he actually paid.' Abu 'Abdullah said, "So that man allows
(some people) the playing of tricks amongst the Muslims (although) the
Prophet said, 'In dealing with Muslims one should not sell them sick
(animals) or bad things or stolen things."

Volume 9, Book 86, Number 110:
Narrated 'Amr bin Ash-Sharid:
Abu Rafi' sold a house to Sa'd bin Malik for four-hundred Mithqal of gold,
and said, "If I had not heard the Prophet saying, 'The neighbor has more
right to be taken care of by his neighbor (than anyone else),' then I would
not have sold it to you."
BOOK 87. INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS (111-171)
Volume 9, Book 87, Number 111:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The commencement of the Divine Inspiration to Allah's Apostle was in the
form of good righteous (true) dreams in his sleep. He never had a dream but
that it came true like bright day light. He used to go in seclusion (the cave
of) Hira where he used to worship(Allah Alone) continuously for many
(days) nights. He used to take with him the journey food for that (stay) and
then come back to (his wife) Khadija to take his food like-wise again for
another period to stay, till suddenly the Truth descended upon him while he
was in the cave of Hira. The angel came to him in it and asked him to read.
The Prophet replied, "I do not know how to read." (The Prophet added),
"The angel caught me (forcefully) and pressed me so hard that I could not
bear it anymore. He then released me and again asked me to read, and I
replied, "I do not know how to read," whereupon he caught me again and
pressed me a second time till I could not bear it anymore. He then released
me and asked me again to read, but again I replied, "I do not know how to
read (or, what shall I read?)." Thereupon he caught me for the third time and
pressed me and then released me and said, "Read: In the Name of your
Lord, Who has created (all that exists). Has created man from a clot. Read
and Your Lord is Most Generous...up to..... ..that which he knew not."
(96.15)
Then Allah's Apostle returned with the Inspiration, his neck muscles
twitching with terror till he entered upon Khadija and said, "Cover me! Cover
me!" They covered him till his fear was over and then he said, "O Khadija,
what is wrong with me?" Then he told her everything that had happened
and said, 'I fear that something may happen to me." Khadija said, 'Never!
But have the glad tidings, for by Allah, Allah will never disgrace you as you
keep good reactions with your Kith and kin, speak the truth, help the poor
and the destitute, serve your guest generously and assist the deserving,
calamity-afflicted ones." Khadija then accompanied him to (her cousin)
Waraqa bin Naufal bin Asad bin 'Abdul 'Uzza bin Qusai. Waraqa was the son
of her paternal uncle, i.e., her father's brother, who during the Pre-Islamic
Period became a Christian and used to write the Arabic writing and used to
write of the Gospels in Arabic as much as Allah wished him to write. He was
an old man and had lost his eyesight. Khadija said to him, "O my cousin!
Listen to the story of your nephew." Waraqa asked, "O my nephew! What
have you seen?" The Prophet described whatever he had seen.
Waraqa said, "This is the same Namus (i.e., Gabriel, the Angel who keeps the
secrets) whom Allah had sent to Moses. I wish I were young and could live
up to the time when your people would turn you out." Allah's Apostle
asked, "Will they turn me out?" Waraqa replied in the affirmative and said:
"Never did a man come with something similar to what you have brought
but was treated with hostility. If I should remain alive till the day when you
will be turned out then I would support you strongly." But after a few days
Waraqa died and the Divine Inspiration was also paused for a while and the
Prophet became so sad as we have heard that he intended several times to
throw himself from the tops of high mountains and every time he went up
the top of a mountain in order to throw himself down, Gabriel would appear
before him and say, "O Muhammad! You are indeed Allah's Apostle in truth"
whereupon his heart would become quiet and he would calm down and
would return home. And whenever the period of the coming of the
inspiration used to become long, he would do as before, but when he used
to reach the top of a mountain, Gabriel would appear before him and say to
him what he had said before. (Ibn 'Abbas said regarding the meaning of: 'He
it is that Cleaves the daybreak (from the darkness)' (6.96) that Al-Asbah.
means the light of the sun during the day and the light of the moon at
night).

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 112:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "A good dream (that comes true) of a righteous man is
one of forty-six parts of prophetism."
Volume 9, Book 87, Number 113:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
The Prophet said, "A true good dream is from Allah, and a bad dream is from
Satan."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 114:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said, "If anyone of you sees a dream that he likes, then it is
from Allah, and he should thank Allah for it and narrate it to others; but if he
sees something else, i.e., a dream that he dislikes, then it is from Satan, and
he should seek refuge with Allah from its evil, and he should not mention it
to anybody, for it will not harm him."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 115:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
The Prophet said, "A good dream that comes true is from Allah, and a bad
dream is from Satan, so if anyone of you sees a bad dream, he should seek
refuge with Allah from Satan and should spit on the left, for the bad dream
will not harm him."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 116:
Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit:
The Prophet said, "The (good) dreams of a faithful believer is a part of the
forty-six parts of prophetism:'

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 117:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The (good) dream of a faithful believer is a part of the
forty-six parts of prophetism."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 118:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "A good dream is a part of the forty six parts
of prophetism."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 119:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Nothing is left of the prophetism except AlMubashshirat." They asked, "What are Al-Mubashshirat?" He replied, "The
true good dreams (that conveys glad tidings)."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 120:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Some people were shown the Night of Qadr as being in the last seven days
(of the month of Ramadan). The Prophet said, "Seek it in the last seven days
(of Ramadan)."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 121:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If I stayed in prison as long as Joseph stayed and then
the messenger came, I would respond to his call (to go out of the prison) ."
Volume 9, Book 87, Number 122:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Whoever sees me in a dream will see me in his
wakefulness, and Satan cannot imitate me in shape." Abu 'Abdullah said,
"Ibn Sirin said, 'Only if he sees the Prophet in his (real) shape.'"

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 123:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "Whoever has seen me in a dream, then no doubt, he has
seen me, for Satan cannot imitate my shape.

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 124:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
The Prophet said, "A good dream is from Allah, and a bad dream is from
Satan. So whoever has seen (in a dream) something he dislike, then he
should spit without saliva, thrice on his left and seek refuge with Allah from
Satan, for it will not harm him, and Satan cannot appear in my shape."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 125:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
The Prophet said, "Whoever sees me (in a dream) then he indeed has seen
the truth ."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 126:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said, "Who ever sees me (in a dream) then he indeed has seen
the truth, as Satan cannot appear in my shape."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 127:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "I have been given the keys of eloquent speech and given
victory with awe (cast into the hearts of the enemy), and while I was
sleeping last night, the keys of the treasures of the earth were brought to
me till they were put in my hand." Abu Huraira added: Allah's Apostle left
(this world) and now you people are carrying those treasures from place to
place.

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 128:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "I saw myself (in a dream) near the Ka'ba last night, and
I saw a man with whitish red complexion, the best you may see amongst
men of that complexion having long hair reaching his earlobes which was
the best hair of its sort, and he had combed his hair and water was dropping
from it, and he was performing the Tawaf around the Ka'ba while he was
leaning on two men or on the shoulders of two men. I asked, 'Who is this
man?' Somebody replied, '(He is) Messiah, son of Mary.' Then I saw another
man with very curly hair, blind in the right eye which looked like a protruding
out grape. I asked, 'Who is this?' Somebody replied, '(He is) Messiah, AdDajjal.'"

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 129:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
About a man who came to Allah's Apostle and said, "I was shown in a dream
last night..." Then Ibn 'Abbas mentioned the narration.
Volume 9, Book 87, Number 130:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle used to visit Um Haram bint Milhan she was the wife of
'Ubada bin As-Samit. One day the Prophet visited her and she provided him
with food and started looking for lice in his head. Then Allah's Apostle slept
and afterwards woke up smiling. Um Haram asked, "What makes you smile,
O Allah's Apostle?" He said, "Some of my followers were presented before
me in my dream as fighters in Allah's Cause, sailing in the middle of the seas
like kings on the thrones or like kings sitting on their thrones." (The narrator
Ishaq is not sure as to which expression was correct). Um Haram added, 'I
said, "O Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah, to make me one of them;" So Allah's
Apostle invoked Allah for her and then laid his head down (and slept). Then
he woke up smiling (again). (Um Haram added): I said, "What makes you
smile, O Allah's Apostle?" He said, "Some people of my followers were
presented before me (in a dream) as fighters in Allah's Cause." He said the
same as he had said before. I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah to make
me from them." He said, "You are among the first ones." Then Um Haram
sailed over the sea during the Caliphate of Muawiya bin Abu Sufyan, and she
fell down from her riding animal after coming ashore, and died.

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 131:
Narrated Kharija bin Zaid bin Thabit:
Um Al-'Ala an Ansari woman who had given a pledge of allegiance to Allah's
Apostle told me:, "The Muhajirln (emigrants) were distributed amongst us
by drawing lots, and we got 'Uthman bin Maz'un in our share. We made him
stay with us in our house. Then he suffered from a disease which proved
fatal. When he died and was given a bath and was shrouded in his clothes.
Allah's Apostle came, I said, (addressing the dead body), 'O Aba As-Sa'ib!
May Allah be Merciful to you! I testify that Allah has honored you.' Allah's
Apostle said, 'How do you know that Allah has honored him?" I replied, 'Let
my father be sacrificed for you, O Allah's Apostle! On whom else shall Allah
bestow. His honor?' Allah's Apostle said, 'As for him, by Allah, death has
come to him. By Allah, I wish him all good (from Allah). By Allah, in spite of
the fact that I am Allah's Apostle, I do not know what Allah will do to me.",
Um Al-'Ala added, "By Allah, I will never attest the righteousness of anybody
after that."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 132:
Narrated Az-Zuhri:
Regarding the above narration, The Prophet said, "I do not know what Allah
will do to him (Uthman bin Maz'un)." Um Al-'Ala said, "I felt very sorry for
that, and then I slept and saw in a dream a flowing spring for 'Uthman bin
Maz'un, and told Allah's Apostle of that, and he said, "That flowing spring
symbolizes his good deeds."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 133:
Narrated Abu Qatada Al-Ansari:
(a companion of the Prophet and one of his cavalry men) "I heard Allah's
Apostle saying, "A good dream is from Allah, and a bad dream is from Satan;
so, if anyone of you had a bad dream which he disliked, then he should spit
on his left and seek refuge with Allah from it, for it will not harm him."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 134:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "While I was sleeping, I was given a bowl full
of milk (in a dream), and I drank of it to my fill until I noticed its wetness
coming out of my nails, and then I gave the rest of it to 'Umar." They (the
people) asked, "What have you interpreted (about the dream)? O Allah's
Apostle?" He said, "(It is Religious) knowledge."
Volume 9, Book 87, Number 135:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "While I was sleeping, I was given a bowl full of milk (in
the dream) and I drank from it (to my fill) till I noticed its wetness coming
out of my limbs. Then I gave the rest of it to 'Umar bin Al-Khattab." The
persons sitting around him, asked, "What have you interpreted (about the
dream) O Allah's Apostle?" He said, "(It is religious) knowledge."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 136:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle said, "While I was sleeping, some people were displayed
before me (in a dream). They were wearing shirts, some of which were
merely covering their breasts, and some a bit longer. Then there passed
before me, 'Umar bin Al-Khattab wearing a shirt he was dragging it (on the
ground behind him.)" They (the people) asked, "What have you interpreted
(about the dream) O Allah's Apostle?" He said, "The Religion."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 137:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "While I was sleeping, I saw (in a dream) the
people being displayed before me, wearing shirts, some of which (were so
short that it) reached as far as their breasts and some reached below that.
Then 'Umar bin Al-Khattab was shown to me and he was wearing a shirt
which he was dragging (behind him)." They asked. What have you
interpreted (about the dream)? O Allah's Apostle?" He said, "The religion."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 138:
Narrated Qais bin 'Ubada:
I was sitting in a gathering in which there was Sa'd bin Malik and Ibn 'Umar.
'Abdullah bin Salam passed in front of them and they said, "This man is from
the people of Paradise." I said to 'Abdullah bin Salam, "They said so-and-so."
He replied, "Subhan Allah! They ought not to have said things of which they
have no knowledge, but I saw (in a dream) that a post was fixed in a green
garden. At the top of the post there was a handhold and below it there was
a servant. I was asked to climb (the post). So I climbed it till I got hold of the
handhold." Then I narrated this dream to Allah's Apostle. Allah's Apostle
said, "'Abdullah will die while still holding the firm reliable handhold (i.e.,
Islam)."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 139:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said (to me), "You were shown to me twice in (my) dream.
Behold, a man was carrying you in a silken piece of cloth and said to me,
"She is your wife, so uncover her,' and behold, it was you. I would then say
(to myself), 'If this is from Allah, then it must happen.' "

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 140:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said to me, "You were shown to me twice (in my dream)
before I married you. I saw an angel carrying you in a silken piece of cloth,
and I said to him, 'Uncover (her),' and behold, it was you. I said (to myself),
'If this is from Allah, then it must happen.' Then you were shown to me, the
angel carrying you in a silken piece of cloth, and I said (to him), 'Uncover
(her), and behold, it was you. I said (to myself), 'If this is from Allah, then it
must happen.' "

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 141:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "I have been sent with Jawami al-Kalim (i.e.,
the shortest expression carrying the widest meanings), and I was made
victorious with awe (caste into the hearts of the enemy), and while I was
sleeping, the keys of the treasures of the earth were brought to me and
were put in my hand." Muhammad said, Jawami'-al-Kalim means that Allah
expresses in one or two statements or thereabouts the numerous matters
that used to be written in the books revealed before (the coming of) the
Prophet .

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 142:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Salam:
(In a dream) I saw myself in a garden, and there was a pillar in the middle of
the garden, and there was a handhold at the top of the pillar. I was asked to
climb it. I said, "I cannot." Then a servant came and lifted up my clothes and
I climbed (the pillar), and then got hold of the handhold, and I woke up
while still holding it. I narrated that to the Prophet who said, "The garden
symbolizes the garden of Islam, and the handhold is the firm Islamic
handhold which indicates that you will be adhering firmly to Islam until you
die."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 143:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
I saw in a dream a piece of silken cloth in my hand, and in whatever direction
in Paradise I waved it, it flew, carrying me there. I narrated this (dream) to
(my sister) Hafsa and she told it to the Prophet who said, (to Hafsa),
"Indeed, your brother is a righteous man," or, "Indeed, 'Abdullah is a
righteous man."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 144:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "When the Day of Resurrection approaches, the dreams
of a believer will hardly fail to come true, and a dream of a believer is one of
forty-six parts of prophetism, and whatever belongs to prothetism can
never be false." Muhammad bin Sirin said, "But I say this." He said, "It used
to be said, 'There are three types of dreams: The reflection of one's
thoughts and experiences one has during wakefulness, what is suggested by
Satan to frighten the dreamer, or glad tidings from Allah. So, if someone has
a dream which he dislikes, he should not tell it to others, but get up and
offer a prayer." He added, "He (Abu Huraira) hated to see a Ghul (i.e., iron
collar around his neck in a dream) and people liked to see fetters (on their
feet in a dream). The fetters on the feet symbolizes one's constant and firm
adherence to religion." And Abu 'Abdullah said, "Ghuls (iron collars) are
used only for necks."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 145:
Narrated Kharija bin Zaid bin Thabit:
Um Al-'Ala an Ansari woman who had given the Pledge of allegiance to
Allah's Apostle said, "'Uthman bin Maz'un came in our share when the
Ansars drew lots to distribute the emigrants (to dwell) among themselves,
He became sick and we looked after (nursed) him till he died. Then we
shrouded him in his clothes. Allah's Apostle came to us, I (addressing the
dead body) said, "May Allah's Mercy be on you, O Aba As-Sa'ib! I testify that
Allah has honored you." The Prophet said, 'How do you know that?' I
replied, 'I do not know, by Allah.' He said, 'As for him, death has come to him
and I wish him all good from Allah. By Allah, though I am Allah's Apostle, I
neither know what will happen to me, nor to you.'" Um Al-'Ala said, "By
Allah, I will never attest the righteousness of anybody after that." She
added, "Later I saw in a dream, a flowing spring for 'Uthman. So I went to
Allah's Apostle and mentioned that to him. He said, 'That is (the symbol of)
his good deeds (the reward for) which is going on for him.' "

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 146:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "(I saw in a dream that) while I was standing at a well
and drawing water therefrom, suddenly Abu Bakr and 'Umar came to me.
Abu Bakr took the bucket and drew one or two buckets (full of water), but
there was weakness in his pulling, but Allah forgave him. Then Ibn AlKhattab took the bucket from Abu Bakr's hand and the bucket turned into a
very large one in his hand. I have never seen any strong man among the
people doing such a hard job as 'Umar did, till (the people drank to their
satisfaction) and water their camels to their fill and they sat near the water."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 147:
Narrated Salim's father:
about the Prophet's dream in which he has seen Abu Bakr and 'Umar: The
Prophet said, "I saw (in a dream) that the people had gathered. Then Abu
Bakr stood up and pulled out one or two buckets full of water (from a well)
and there was weakness in his pulling -- may Allah forgive him. Then Ibn AlKhattab stood up, and the bucket turned into a very large one and I have
never seen any strong man among the people doing such a hard job. He
pulled out so much water that the people (drank to their satisfaction) and
watered their camels to their fill, (and then after quenching their thirst) they
sat beside the water."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 148:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "While I was sleeping, I saw myself standing at a well
over which there was a bucket. I pulled out from it as many buckets of water
as Allah wished, and then Ibn Abi Quhafa (Abu Bakr) took the bucket from
me and pulled out one or two full buckets, and there was weakness in his
pull--may Allah forgive him. Then the bucket turned into a very large one and
'Umar bin Al-Khattab took it. I have never seen any strong man among the
people, drawing water with such strength as 'Umar did, till the people
(drank to their satisfaction and) watered their camels to their fill;
whereupon the camels sat beside the water."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 149:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "While I was sleeping, I saw myself standing over a tank
(well) giving water to the people to drink. Then Abu Bakr came to me and
took the bucket from me in order to relieve me and he pulled out one or two
full buckets, and there was weakness in his pulling --may Allah forgive him.
Then Ibn Al-Khattab took it from him and went on drawing water till the
people left (after being satisfied) while the tank was over flowing with
water."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 150:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
We were sitting with Allah's Apostle, he said, "While I was sleeping, I saw
myself in Paradise. Suddenly I saw a woman performing ablution beside a
palace. I asked, "For whom is this palace?" They (the angels) replied, "It is
for 'Umar bin Al-Khattab." Then I remembered 'Umar's ghira and went back
hurriedly." On hearing that, 'Umar started weeping and said, " Let my father
and mother be sacrificed for you. O Allah's Apostle! How dare I think of my
Ghira being offended by you?

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 151:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said: (I saw in a dream that) I entered Paradise, and behold,
there was a palace built of gold! I asked, 'For whom is this palace?' They (the
angels) replied, 'For a man from the Quraish.' " The Prophet added, "O Ibn
Al-Khattab! Nothing stopped me from entering it except your Ghira." 'Umar
said, "How dare I think of my Ghira being offended by you, O Allah's
Apostle?"

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 152:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
We were sitting with Allah's Apostle he said, "While I was sleeping, I saw
myself in Paradise, and behold, a woman was performing ablution by the
side of a palace. I asked, 'For whom is this palace?' They replied, 'For 'Umar'
Then I remembered the Ghira of 'Umar and returned immediately." 'Umar
wept (on hearing that) and said, " Let my father and mother be sacrificed
for you, O Allah's Apostle! How dare I think of my Ghira being offended by
you.'

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 153:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "While I was sleeping, I saw myself performing the
Tawaf of the Ka'ba. Behold, there I saw a whitish-red lank-haired man
(holding himself) between two men with water dropping from his hair. I
asked, 'Who is this?' The people replied, 'He is the son of Mary.' Then I
turned my face to see another man with red complexion, big body, curly
hair, and blind in the right eye which looked like a protruding out grape. I
asked, 'Who is he?' They replied, 'He is Ad-Dajjal.' Ibn Qatan resembles him
more than anybody else among the people and Ibn Qatan was a man from
Bani Al-Mustaliq from Khuza'a."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 154:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "While I was sleeping, I saw a bowl full of milk
was brought to me and I drank of it (to my fill) till I noticed its wetness
flowing (in my body). Then I gave the remaining of it to 'Umar." They asked,
"O Allah's Apostle! What have you interpreted (about the dream)? He said,
"(It is Religious) knowledge." (See Hadith No. 134)

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 155:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Men from the companions of Allah's Apostle used to see dreams during the
lifetime of Allah's Apostle and they used to narrate those dreams to Allah's
Apostle. Allah's Apostle would interpret them as Allah wished. I was a young
man and used to stay in the mosque before my wedlock. I said to myself, "If
there were any good in myself, I too would see what these people see." So
when I went to bed one night, I said, "O Allah! If you see any good in me,
show me a good dream." So while I was in that state, there came to me (in a
dream) two angels. In the hand of each of them, there was a mace of iron,
and both of them were taking me to Hell, and I was between them, invoking
Allah, "O Allah! I seek refuge with You from Hell." Then I saw myself being
confronted by another angel holding a mace of iron in his hand. He said to
me, "Do not be afraid, you will be an excellent man if you only pray more
often." So they took me till they stopped me at the edge of Hell, and behold,
it was built inside like a well and it had side posts like those of a well, and
beside each post there was an angel carrying an iron mace. I saw therein
many people hanging upside down with iron chains, and I recognized
therein some men from the Quraish. Then (the angels) took me to the right
side. I narrated this dream to (my sister) Hafsa and she told it to Allah's
Apostle. Allah's Apostle said, "No doubt, 'Abdullah is a good man." (Nafi'
said, "Since then 'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to pray much.)

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 156:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
I was a young unmarried man during the lifetime of the Prophet. I used to
sleep in the mosque. Anyone who had a dream, would narrate it to the
Prophet. I said, "O Allah! If there is any good for me with You, then show me
a dream so that Allah's Apostle may interpret it for me." So I slept and saw
(in a dream) two angels came to me and took me along with them, and they
met another angel who said to me, "Don't be afraid, you are a good man."
They took me towards the Fire, and behold, it was built inside like a well, and
therein I saw people some of whom I recognized, and then the angels took
me to the right side. In the morning, I mentioned that dream to Hafsa. Hafsa
told me that she had mentioned it to the Prophet and he said, "'Abdullah is a
righteous man if he only prays more at night." (Az-Zuhri said, "After that,
'Abdullah used to pray more at night.")

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 157:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "While I was sleeping, I saw that a cup full of
milk was brought to me and I drank of it and gave the remaining of it to
'Umar bin Al-Khattab." They asked. What have you interpreted (about the
dream)? O Allah's Apostle?" The Prophet said. "(It is Religious) knowledge."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 158:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle said, "While I was sleeping, two golden bangles were put in
my two hands, so I got scared (frightened) and disliked it, but I was given
permission to blow them off, and they flew away. I interpret it as a symbol
of two liars who will appear." 'Ubaidullah said, "One of them was Al-'Ansi
who was killed by Fairuz at Yemen and the other was Musailama (at Najd) .

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 159:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "I saw in a dream that I was migrating from Mecca to a
land where there were date palm trees. I thought that it might be the land
of Al-Yamama or Hajar, but behold, it turned out to be Yathrib (i.e. Medina).
And I saw cows (being slaughtered) there, but the reward given by Allah is
better (than worldly benefits). Behold, those cows proved to symbolize the
believers (who were killed) on the Day (of the battle) of Uhud, and the good
(which I saw in the dream) was the good and the reward and the truth
which Allah bestowed upon us after the Badr battle. (or the Battle of Uhud)
and that was the victory bestowed by Allah in the Battle of Khaibar and the
conquest of Mecca) .

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 160:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "We (Muslims) are the last (to come) but (will be) the
foremost (on the Day of Resurrection)." Allah's Apostle further said, ''While
sleeping, I was given the treasures of the world and two golden bangles
were put in my hands, but I felt much annoyed, and those two bangles
distressed me very much, but I was inspired that I should blow them off, so I
blew them and they flew away. Then I interpreted that those two bangles
were the liars between whom I was (i.e., the one of San'a' and the one of
Yamama)."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 161:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "I saw (in a dream) a black woman with unkempt hair
going out of Medina and settling at Mahai'a, i.e., Al-Juhfa. I interpreted that
as a symbol of epidemic of Medina being transferred to that place (AlJuhfa)."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 162:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
concerning the dream of the Prophet in Medina: The Prophet said, "I saw (in
a dream) a black woman with unkempt hair going out of Medina and
settling at Mahai'a. I interpreted that as (a symbol of) the epidemic of
Medina being transferred to Mahai'a, namely, Al-Juhfa."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 163:
Narrated Salim's father:
The Prophet said, "I saw (in a dream) a black woman with unkempt hair
going out of Medina and settling in Mahai'a. I interpreted that as (a symbol
of) epidemic of Medina being transferred to Mahai'a, namely, Al-Juhfa."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 164:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "I saw in a dream that I waved a sword and it broke in the
middle, and behold, that symbolized the casualties the believers suffered on
the Day (of the battle) of Uhud. Then I waved the sword again, and it
became better than it had ever been before, and behold, that symbolized
the Conquest (of Mecca) which Allah brought about and the gathering of
the believers. "

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 165:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet said, "Whoever claims to have seen a dream which he did not
see, will be ordered to make a knot between two barley grains which he will
not be able to do; and if somebody listens to the talk of some people who
do not like him (to listen) or they run away from him, then molten lead will
be poured into his ears on the Day of Resurrection; and whoever makes a
picture, will be punished on the Day of Resurrection and will be ordered to
put a soul in that picture, which he will not be able to do."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 166:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
as above, 165.

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 167:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "The worst lie is that a person claims to have seen a
dream which he has not seen."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 168:
Narrated Abu Salama:
I used to see a dream which would make me sick till I heard Abu Qatada
saying, "I too, used to see a dream which would make me sick till I heard the
Prophet saying, "A good dream is from Allah, so if anyone of you saw a
dream which he liked, he should not tell it to anybody except to the one
whom he loves, and if he saw a dream which he disliked, then he should
seek refuge with Allah from its evil and from the evil of Satan, and spit three
times (on his left) and should not tell it to anybody, for it will not harm him. "

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 169:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "If anyone of you saw a dream which he liked,
then that was from Allah, and he should thank Allah for it and tell it to
others; but if he saw something else, i.e, a dream which he did not like, then
that is from Satan and he should seek refuge with Allah from it and should
not tell it to anybody for it will not harm him."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 170:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
A man came to Allah's Apostle and said, "I saw in a dream, a cloud having
shade. Butter and honey were dropping from it and I saw the people
gathering it in their hands, some gathering much and some a little. And
behold, there was a rope extending from the earth to the sky, and I saw that
you (the Prophet) held it and went up, and then another man held it and
went up and (after that) another (third) held it and went up, and then after
another (fourth) man held it, but it broke and then got connected again."
Abu Bakr said, "O Allah's Apostle! Let my father be sacrificed for you! Allow
me to interpret this dream." The Prophet said to him, "Interpret it." Abu
Bakr said, "The cloud with shade symbolizes Islam, and the butter and honey
dropping from it, symbolizes the Quran, its sweetness dropping and some
people learning much of the Qur'an and some a little. The rope which is
extended from the sky to the earth is the Truth which you (the Prophet) are
following. You follow it and Allah will raise you high with it, and then
another man will follow it and will rise up with it and another person will
follow it and then another man will follow it but it will break and then it will
be connected for him and he will rise up with it. O Allah's Apostle! Let my
father be sacrificed for you! Am I right or wrong?" The Prophet replied, "You
are right in some of it and wrong in some." Abu Bakr said, "O Allah's
Prophet! By Allah, you must tell me in what I was wrong." The Prophet said,
"Do not swear."

Volume 9, Book 87, Number 171:
Narrated Samura bin Jundub:
Allah's Apostle very often used to ask his companions, "Did anyone of you
see a dream?" So dreams would be narrated to him by those whom Allah
wished to tell. One morning the Prophet said, "Last night two persons came
to me (in a dream) and woke me up and said to me, 'Proceed!' I set out with
them and we came across a man Lying down, and behold, another man was
standing over his head, holding a big rock. Behold, he was throwing the rock
at the man's head, injuring it. The rock rolled away and the thrower followed
it and took it back. By the time he reached the man, his head returned to the
normal state. The thrower then did the same as he had done before. I said
to my two companions, 'Subhan Allah! Who are these two persons?' They
said, 'Proceed!' So we proceeded and came to a man Lying flat on his back
and another man standing over his head with an iron hook, and behold, he
would put the hook in one side of the man's mouth and tear off that side of
his face to the back (of the neck) and similarly tear his nose from front to
back and his eye from front to back. Then he turned to the other side of the
man's face and did just as he had done with the other side. He hardly
completed this side when the other side returned to its normal state. Then
he returned to it to repeat what he had done before. I said to my two
companions, 'Subhan Allah! Who are these two persons?' They said to me,
'Proceed!' So we proceeded and came across something like a Tannur (a
kind of baking oven, a pit usually clay-lined for baking bread)." I think the
Prophet said, "In that oven t here was much noise and voices." The Prophet
added, "We looked into it and found naked men and women, and behold, a
flame of fire was reaching to them from underneath, and when it reached
them, they cried loudly. I asked them, 'Who are these?' They said to me,
'Proceed!' And so we proceeded and came across a river." I think he said,
".... red like blood." The Prophet added, "And behold, in the river there was
a man swimming, and on the bank there was a man who had collected many
stones. Behold. while the other man was swimming, he went near him. The
former opened his mouth and the latter (on the bank) threw a stone into his
mouth whereupon he went swimming again. He returned and every time
the performance was repeated, I asked my two companions, 'Who are these
(two) persons?' They replied, 'Proceed! Proceed!' And we proceeded till we
came to a man with a repulsive appearance, the most repulsive appearance,
you ever saw a man having! Beside him there was a fire and he was kindling
it and running around it. I asked my companions, 'Who is this (man)?' They
said to me, 'Proceed! Proceed!' So we proceeded till we reached a garden of
deep green dense vegetation, having all sorts of spring colors. In the midst
of the garden there was a very tall man and I could hardly see his head
because of his great height, and around him there were children in such a
large number as I have never seen. I said to my companions, 'Who is this?'
They replied, 'Proceed! Proceed!' So we proceeded till we came to a majestic
huge garden, greater and better than I have ever seen! My two companions
said to me, 'Go up and I went up' The Prophet added, "So we ascended till
we reached a city built of gold and silver bricks and we went to its gate and
asked (the gatekeeper) to open the gate, and it was opened and we entered
the city and found in it, men with one side of their bodies as handsome as
the handsomest person you have ever seen, and the other side as ugly as
the ugliest person you have ever seen. My two companions ordered those
men to throw themselves into the river. Behold, there was a river flowing
across (the city), and its water was like milk in whiteness. Those men went
and threw themselves in it and then returned to us after the ugliness (of
their bodies) had disappeared and they became in the best shape." The
Prophet further added, "My two companions (angels) said to me, 'This place
is the Eden Paradise, and that is your place.' I raised up my sight, and behold,
there I saw a palace like a white cloud! My two companions said to me, 'That
(palace) is your place.' I said to them, 'May Allah bless you both! Let me
enter it.' They replied, 'As for now, you will not enter it, but you shall enter it
(one day) I said to them, 'I have seen many wonders tonight. What does all
that mean which I have seen?' They replied, 'We will inform you: As for the
first man you came upon whose head was being injured with the rock, he is
the symbol of the one who studies the Quran and then neither recites it nor
acts on its orders, and sleeps, neglecting the enjoined prayers. As for the
man you came upon whose sides of mouth, nostrils and eyes were torn off
from front to back, he is the symbol of the man who goes out of his house in
the morning and tells so many lies that it spreads all over the world. And
those naked men and women whom you saw in a construction resembling
an oven, they are the adulterers and the adulteresses;, and the man whom
you saw swimming in the river and given a stone to swallow, is the eater of
usury (Riba) and the bad looking man whom you saw near the fire kindling it
and going round it, is Malik, the gatekeeper of Hell and the tall man whom
you saw in the garden, is Abraham and the children around him are those
children who die with Al-Fitra (the Islamic Faith)." The narrator added: Some
Muslims asked the Prophet, "O Allah's Apostle! What about the children of
pagans?" The Prophet replied, "And also the children of pagans." The
Prophet added, "My two companions added, 'The men you saw half
handsome and half ugly were those persons who had mixed an act that was
good with another that was bad, but Allah forgave them.'"
BOOK 88. AFFLICTIONS AND THE END OF THE WORLD (172-250)
Volume 9, Book 88, Number 172:
Narrated Asma':
The Prophet said, "I will be at my Lake-Fount (Kauthar) waiting for whoever
will come to me. Then some people will be taken away from me whereupon
I will say, 'My followers!' It will be said, 'You do not know they turned
Apostates as renegades (deserted their religion).'" (Ibn Abi Mulaika said,
"Allah, we seek refuge with You from turning on our heels from the (Islamic)
religion and from being put to trial").

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 173:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "I am your predecessor at the Lake-Fount (Kauthar) and
some men amongst you will be brought to me, and when I will try to hand
them some water, they will be pulled away from me by force whereupon I
will say, 'O Lord, my companions!' Then the Almighty will say, 'You do not
know what they did after you left, they introduced new things into the
religion after you.'"

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 174:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:
I heard the Prophet saying, "I am your predecessor at the Lake-Fount
(Kauthar), and whoever will come to it, will drink from it, and whoever will
drink from it, will never become thirsty after that. There will come to me
some people whom I know and they know me, and then a barrier will be set
up between me and them." Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri added that the Prophet
further said: "I will say those people are from me. It will be said, 'You do not
know what changes and new things they did after you.' Then I will say, 'Far
removed (from mercy), far removed (from mercy), those who changed (the
religion) after me! "

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 175:
Narrated Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said to us, "You will see after me, selfishness (on the part of
other people) and other matters that you will disapprove of." They asked,
"What do you order us to do, O Allah's Apostle? (under such
circumstances)?" He said, "Pay their rights to them (to the rulers) and ask
your right from Allah."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 176:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet said, "Whoever disapproves of something done by his ruler
then he should be patient, for whoever disobeys the ruler even a little (little
= a span) will die as those who died in the Pre-lslamic Period of Ignorance.
(i.e. as rebellious Sinners).

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 177:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "Whoever notices something which he dislikes done by his
ruler, then he should be patient, for whoever becomes separate from the
company of the Muslims even for a span and then dies, he will die as those
who died in the Pre-lslamic period of Ignorance (as rebellious sinners).
(Fateh-Al-Bari page 112, Vol. 16)

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 178:
Narrated Junada bin Abi Umaiya
We entered upon 'Ubada bin As-Samit while he was sick. We said, "May
Allah make you healthy. Will you tell us a Hadith you heard from the Prophet
and by which Allah may make you benefit?" He said, "The Prophet called us
and we gave him the Pledge of allegiance for Islam, and among the
conditions on which he took the Pledge from us, was that we were to listen
and obey (the orders) both at the time when we were active and at the time
when we were tired, and at our difficult time and at our ease and to be
obedient to the ruler and give him his right even if he did not give us our
right, and not to fight against him unless we noticed him having open Kufr
(disbelief) for which we would have a proof with us from Allah."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 179:
Narrated Usaid bin Hudair:
A man came to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! You appointed
such-and-such person and you did not appoint me?" The Prophet said, "After
me you will see rulers not giving you your right (but you should give them
their right) and be patient till you meet me."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 180:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard the truthful and trusted by Allah (i.e., the Prophet ) saying, "The
destruction of my followers will be through the hands of young men from
Quraish."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 181:
Narrated Zainab bint Jahsh:
The Prophet got up from his sleep with a flushed red face and said, "None
has the right to be worshipped but Allah. Woe to the Arabs, from the Great
evil that is nearly approaching them. Today a gap has been made in the wall
of Gog and Magog like this." (Sufyan illustrated by this forming the number
90 or 100 with his fingers.) It was asked, "Shall we be destroyed though
there are righteous people among us?" The Prophet said, "Yes, if evil
increased."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 182:
Narrated Usama bin Zaid:
Once the Prophet stood over one of the high buildings of Medina and then
said (to the people), "Do you see what I see?" They said, "No." He said, "I
see afflictions falling among your houses as rain drops fall."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 183:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Time will pass rapidly, good deeds will decrease,
miserliness will be thrown (in the hearts of the people) afflictions will
appear and there will be much 'Al-Harj." They said, "O Allah's Apostle! What
is "Al-Harj?" He said, "Killing! Killing!" (See Hadith No. 63, Vol. 8)

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 184:
Narrated 'Abdullah and Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "Near the establishment of the Hour there will be days
during which Religious ignorance will spread, knowledge will be taken away
(vanish) and there will be much Al-Harj, and Al-Harj means killing."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 185:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "Near the establishment of the Hour there will be days
during which (religious) knowledge will be taken away (vanish) and general
ignorance will spread, and there will be Al-Harj in abundance, and Al-Harj
means killing."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 186:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said...(as above, 185). And Harj, in the Ethiopian language,
means killing.

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 187:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "Near the establishment of the Hour, there will be the
days of Al-Harj, and the religious knowledge will be taken away (vanish i.e.
by the death of Religious scholars) and general ignorance will spread." Abu
Musa said, "Al-Harj, in the Ethiopian language, means killing," Ibn Mas'ud
added: I heard Allah's Apostle saying; (It will be) from among the most
wicked people who will be living at the time when the Hour will be
established."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 188:
Narrated Az-Zubair bin 'Adi:
We went to Anas bin Malik and complained about the wrong we were
suffering at the hand of Al-Hajjaj. Anas bin Malik said, "Be patient till you
meet your Lord, for no time will come upon you but the time following it will
be worse than it. I heard that from the Prophet."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 189:
Narrated Um Salama:
(the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle woke up one night in a state of
terror and said, "Subhan Allah, How many treasures Allah has sent down!
And how many afflictions have been sent down! Who will go and wake the
lady dwellers (wives of the Prophet) up of these rooms (for prayers)?" He
meant his wives, so that they might pray. He added, "A well-dressed (soul) in
this world may be naked in the Hereafter."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 190:
Narrated :
The statement of the Prophet: Whoever takes up arms against us, is not
from us."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 191:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever takes up arms against us, is not from us."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 192:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "Whoever takes up arms against us, is not from us."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 193:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "None of you should point out towards his Muslim brother
with a weapon, for he does not know, Satan may tempt him to hit him and
thus he would fall into a pit of fire (Hell)"
Volume 9, Book 88, Number 194:
Narrated Sufyan:
I said to 'Amr, "O Abu Muhammad! Did you hear Jabir bin 'Abdullah saying,
'A man carrying arrows passed through the mosque and Allah's Apostle said
to him, 'Hold the arrows by their heads! "'Amr replied, "Yes."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 195:
Narrated Jabir:
A man passed through the mosque and he was carrying arrows, the heads of
which were exposed (protruding). The man was ordered (by the Prophet) to
hold the iron heads so that it might not scratch (injure) any Muslim.

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 196:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "If anyone of you passed through our mosque or through
our market while carrying arrows, he should hold the iron heads," or said,
"..... he should hold (their heads) firmly with his hand lest he should injure
one of the Muslims with it."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 197:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet, said, "Abusing a Muslim is Fusuq (evil doing) and killing him is
Kufr (disbelief)."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 198:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Do not revert to disbelief after me by striking
(cutting) the necks of one another."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 199:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
Allah's Apostle addressed the people saying, "Don't you know what is the
day today?" They replied, "Allah and His Apostle know better." We thought
that he might give that day another name. The Prophet said, "Isn't it the day
of An-Nahr?" We replied, "Yes. O Allah's Apostle." He then said, "What town
is this? Isn't it the forbidden (Sacred) Town (Mecca)?" We replied, "Yes, O
Allah's Apostle." He then said, "Your blood, your properties, your honors
and your skins (i.e., bodies) are as sacred to one another like the sanctity of
this day of yours in this month of yours in this town of yours. (Listen)
Haven't I conveyed Allah's message to you?" We replied, "Yes" He said, "O
Allah! Be witness (for it). So it is incumbent upon those who are present to
convey it (this message of mine) to those who are absent because the
informed one might comprehend what I have said better than the present
audience who will convey it to him.)" The narrator added: In fact, it was like
that. The Prophet added, "Beware! Do not renegade as disbelievers after me
by striking (cutting) the necks of one another."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 200:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
The Prophet said, "Beware! Do not renegade as (disbelievers) after me by
striking (cutting) the necks of one another."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 201:
Narrated Jarir:
The Prophet said to me during Hajjat-al-Wada', "Let the people keep quiet
and listen." Then he said (addressing the people), "Beware! Do not
renegade as disbelievers after me by striking (cutting) the necks of one
another."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 202:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "There will be afflictions (in the near future) during
which a sitting person will be better than a standing one, and the standing
one will be better than the walking one, and the walking one will be better
than the running one, and whoever will expose himself to these afflictions,
they will destroy him. So whoever can find a place of protection or refuge
from them, should take shelter in it."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 203:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "There will be afflictions (in the near future) during
which a sitting person will be better than a standing one, and the standing
one will be better than a walking one, and the walking one will be better
than a running one, and whoever will expose himself to these afflictions,
they will destroy him. So whoever can find a place of protection or refuge
from them, should take shelter in it."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 204:
Narrated Al-Hasan:
(Al-Ahnaf said:) I went out carrying my arms during the nights of the
affliction (i.e. the war between 'Ali and 'Aisha) and Abu Bakra met me and
asked, "Where are you going?" I replied, "I intend to help the cousin of
Allah's Apostle (i.e.,'Ali)." Abu Bakra said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'If two
Muslims take out their swords to fight each other, then both of them will be
from amongst the people of the Hell-Fire.' It was said to the Prophet, 'It is
alright for the killer but what about the killed one?' He replied, 'The killed
one had the intention to kill his opponent.'" (See Hadith No. 30, Vol. 1)

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 205:
Narrated Al-Ahnaf:
Abu Bakra said: The Prophet said (as above, 204).

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 206:
Narrated Hudhaifa bin Al-Yaman:
The people used to ask Allah's Apostle about the good but I used to ask him
about the evil lest I should be overtaken by them. So I said, "O Allah's
Apostle! We were living in ignorance and in an (extremely) worst
atmosphere, then Allah brought to us this good (i.e., Islam); will there be
any evil after this good?" He said, "Yes." I said, 'Will there be any good after
that evil?" He replied, "Yes, but it will be tainted (not pure.)'' I asked, "What
will be its taint?" He replied, "(There will be) some people who will guide
others not according to my tradition? You will approve of some of their
deeds and disapprove of some others." I asked, "Will there be any evil after
that good?" He replied, "Yes, (there will be) some people calling at the gates
of the (Hell) Fire, and whoever will respond to their call, will be thrown by
them into the (Hell) Fire." I said, "O Allah s Apostle! Will you describe them
to us?" He said, "They will be from our own people and will speak our
language." I said, "What do you order me to do if such a state should take
place in my life?" He said, "Stick to the group of Muslims and their Imam
(ruler)." I said, "If there is neither a group of Muslims nor an Imam (ruler)?"
He said, "Then turn away from all those sects even if you were to bite (eat)
the roots of a tree till death overtakes you while you are in that state."
Volume 9, Book 88, Number 207:
Narrated Abu Al-Aswad:
An army unit was being recruited from the people of Medina and my name
was written among them. Then I met 'Ikrima, and when I informed him
about it, he discouraged me very strongly and said, "Ibn 'Abbas told me that
there were some Muslims who were with the pagans to increase their
number against Allah's Apostle (and the Muslim army) so arrows (from the
Muslim army) would hit one of them and kill him or a Muslim would strike
him (with his sword) and kill him. So Allah revealed:-'Verily! As for those whom the angels take (in death) while they are
wronging themselves (by staying among the disbelievers).' (4.97)

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 208:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
Allah's Apostle related to us, two prophetic narrations one of which I have
seen fulfilled and I am waiting for the fulfillment of the other. The Prophet
told us that the virtue of honesty descended in the roots of men's hearts
(from Allah) and then they learned it from the Qur'an and then they learned
it from the Sunna (the Prophet's traditions). The Prophet further told us
how that honesty will be taken away: He said: "Man will go to sleep during
which honesty will be taken away from his heart and only its trace will
remain in his heart like the trace of a dark spot; then man will go to sleep,
during which honesty will decrease further still, so that its trace will
resemble the trace of blister as when an ember is dropped on one's foot
which would make it swell, and one would see it swollen but there would be
nothing inside. People would be carrying out their trade but hardly will there
be a trustworthy person. It will be said, 'in such-and-such tribe there is an
honest man,' and later it will be said about some man, 'What a wise, polite
and strong man he is!' Though he will not have faith equal even to a mustard
seed in his heart." No doubt, there came upon me a time when I did not
mind dealing (bargaining) with anyone of you, for if he was a Muslim his
Islam would compel him to pay me what is due to me, and if he was a
Christian, the Muslim official would compel him to pay me what is due to
me, but today I do not deal except with such-and-such person.

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 209:
Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa:
That he visited Al-Hajjaj (bin Yusuf). Al-Hajjaj said, "O son of Al-Akwa! You
have turned on your heels (i.e., deserted Islam) by staying (in the desert)
with the bedouins." Salama replied, "No, but Allah's Apostle allowed me to
stay with the bedouin in the desert." Narrated Yazid bin Abi Ubaid: When
'Uthman bin Affan was killed (martyred), Salama bin Al-Akwa' went out to a
place called Ar-Rabadha and married there and begot children, and he
stayed there till a few nights before his death when he came to Medina.

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 210:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle said, "There will come a time when the best property of a
Muslim will be sheep which he will take to the tops of mountains and the
places of rainfall so as to flee with his religion from the afflictions.

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 211:
Narrated Anas:
The people started asking the Prophet too many questions importunately.
So one day he ascended the pulpit and said, "You will not ask me any
question but I will explain it to you." I looked right and left, and behold,
every man was covering his head with his garment and weeping. Then got
up a man who, whenever quarreling with somebody, used to be accused of
not being the son of his father. He said, "O Allah's Apostle! Who is my
father?" The Prophet replied, "Your father is Hudhaifa." Then 'Umar got up
and said, "We accept Allah as our Lord, Islam as our religion and Muhammad
as our Apostle and we seek refuge with Allah from the evil of afflictions."
The Prophet said, " I have never seen the good and bad like on this day. No
doubt, Paradise and Hell was displayed in front of me till I saw them in front
of that wall," Qatada said: This Hadith used to be mentioned as an
explanation of this Verse:-- 'O you who believe! Ask not questions about
things which, if made plain to you, may cause you trouble.' (5.101)

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 212:
Narrated Salim's father:
The Prophet stood up beside the pulpit (and pointed with his finger towards
the East) and said, "Afflictions are there! Afflictions are there, from where
the side of the head of Satan comes out," or said, "..the side of the sun.."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 213:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
I heard Allah's Apostle while he was facing the East, saying, "Verily!
Afflictions are there, from where the side of the head of Satan comes out."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 214:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "O Allah! Bestow Your blessings on our Sham! O Allah!
Bestow Your blessings on our Yemen." The People said, "And also on our
Najd." He said, "O Allah! Bestow Your blessings on our Sham (north)! O
Allah! Bestow Your blessings on our Yemen." The people said, "O Allah's
Apostle! And also on our Najd." I think the third time the Prophet said,
"There (in Najd) is the place of earthquakes and afflictions and from there
comes out the side of the head of Satan."
Volume 9, Book 88, Number 215:
Narrated Sa'id bin Jubair:
'Abdullah bin 'Umar came to us and we hoped that he would narrate to us a
good Hadith. But before we asked him, a man got up and said to him, "O
Abu 'Abdur-Rahman! Narrate to us about the battles during the time of the
afflictions, as Allah says:-'And fight them until there is no more afflictions (i.e. no more worshipping
of others besides Allah).'" (2.193) Ibn 'Umar said (to the man), "Do you know
what is meant by afflictions? Let your mother bereave you! Muhammad used
to fight against the pagans, for a Muslim was put to trial in his religion (The
pagans will either kill him or chain him as a captive). His fighting was not like
your fighting which is carried on for the sake of ruling."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 216:
Narrated Shaqiq:
I heard Hudhaifa saying, "While we were sitting with 'Umar, he said, 'Who
among you remembers the statement of the Prophet about the afflictions?'
Hudhaifa said, "The affliction of a man in his family, his property, his children
and his neighbors are expiated by his prayers, Zakat (and alms) and
enjoining good and forbidding evil." 'Umar said, "I do not ask you about
these afflictions, but about those afflictions which will move like the waves
of the sea." Hudhaifa said, "Don't worry about it, O chief of the believers, for
there is a closed door between you and them." 'Umar said, "Will that door
be broken or opened?" I said, "No. it will be broken." 'Umar said, "Then it
will never be closed," I said, "Yes." We asked Hudhaifa, "Did 'Umar know
what that door meant?" He replied, "Yes, as I know that there will be night
before tomorrow morning, that is because I narrated to him a true narration
free from errors." We dared not ask Hudhaifa as to whom the door
represented so we ordered Masruq to ask him what does the door stand
for? He replied, "'Umar."
Volume 9, Book 88, Number 217:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari:
The Prophet went out to one of the gardens of Medina for some business
and I went out to follow him. When he entered the garden, I sat at its gate
and said to myself, "To day I will be the gatekeeper of the Prophet though
he has not ordered me." The Prophet went and finished his need and went
to sit on the constructed edge of the well and uncovered his legs and hung
them in the well. In the meantime Abu Bakr came and asked permission to
enter. I said (to him), "Wait till I get you permission." Abu Bakr waited
outside and I went to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Prophet! Abu Bakr
asks your permission to enter." He said, "Admit him, and give him the glad
tidings of entering Paradise." So Abu Bakr entered and sat on the right side
of the Prophet and uncovered his legs and hung them in the well. Then
'Umar came and I said (to him), "Wait till I get you permission." The Prophet
said, "Admit him and give him the glad tidings of entering Paradise." So
Umar entered and sat on the left side of the Prophet and uncovered his legs
and hung them in the well so that one side of the well became fully occupied
and there remained no place for any-one to sit. Then 'Uthman came and I
said (to him), "Wait till I get permission for you." The Prophet said, "Admit
him and give him the glad tidings of entering Paradise with a calamity which
will befall him." When he entered, he could not find any place to sit with
them so he went to the other edge of the well opposite them and
uncovered his legs and hung them in the well. I wished that a brother of
mine would come, so I invoked Allah for his coming. (Ibn Al-Musaiyab said, "I
interpreted that (narration) as indicating their graves. The first three are
together and the grave of 'Uthman is separate from theirs.")

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 218:
Narrated Abu Wail:
Someone said to Usama, "Will you not talk to this (Uthman)?" Usama said, "I
talked to him (secretly) without being the first man to open an evil door. I
will never tell a ruler who rules over two men or more that he is good after I
heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'A man will be brought and put in Hell (Fire)
and he will circumambulate (go around and round) in Hell (Fire) like a
donkey of a (flour) grinding mill, and all the people of Hell (Fire) will gather
around him and will say to him, O so-and-so! Didn't you use to order others
for good and forbid them from evil?' That man will say, 'I used to order
others to do good but I myself never used to do it, and I used to forbid
others from evil while I myself used to do evil.' "

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 219:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
During the battle of Al-Jamal, Allah benefited me with a Word (I heard from
the Prophet). When the Prophet heard the news that the people of the
Persia had made the daughter of Khosrau their Queen (ruler), he said,
"Never will succeed such a nation as makes a woman their ruler."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 220:
Narrated Abu Maryam Abdullah bin Ziyad Al-Aasadi:
When Talha, AzZubair and 'Aisha moved to Basra, 'Ali sent 'Ammar bin Yasir
and Hasan bin 'Ali who came to us at Kufa and ascended the pulpit. Al-Hasan
bin 'Ali was at the top of the pulpit and 'Ammar was below Al-Hasan. We all
gathered before him. I heard 'Ammar saying, "'Aisha has moved to Al-Busra.
By Allah! She is the wife of your Prophet in this world and in the Hereafter.
But Allah has put you to test whether you obey Him (Allah) or her ('Aisha)."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 221:
Narrated Abu Wail:
'Ammar stood on the pulpit at Kufa and mentioned 'Aisha and her coming
(to Busra) and said, "She is the wife of your Prophet in this world and in the
Hereafter, but you people are being put to test in this issue."
Volume 9, Book 88, Number 222:
Narrated Abu Wail:
Abu Musa and Abii Mas'ud went to 'Ammar when 'Ali had sent him to Kufa
to exhort them to fight (on 'Ali's side). They said to him, "Since you have
become a Muslim, we have never seen you doing a deed more criticizable to
us than your haste in this matter." 'Ammar said, "Since you (both) became
Muslims, I have never seen you doing a deed more criticizable to me than
your keeping away from this matter." Then Abu Mas'ud provided 'Ammar
and Abu Musa with two-piece outfits to wear, and one of them went to the
mosque (of Kufa).

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 223:
Narrated Shaqiq bin Salama:
I was sitting with Abu Mas'ud and Abu Musa and 'Ammar. Abu Mas'ud said
(to 'Ammar), "There is none of your companions but, if I wish, I could find
fault with him except with you. Since you joined the company of the
Prophet I have never seen anything done by you more criticizable by me
than your haste in this issue." 'Ammar said, O Abu Mas'ud ! I have never
seen anything done by you or by this companion of yours (i.e., Abu Musa)
more criticizable by me than your keeping away from this issue since the
time you both joined the company of the Prophet."
Then Abu Mas'ud who was a rich man, said (to his servant), "O boy! Bring
two suits." Then he gave one to Abu Musa and the other to 'Ammar and said
(to them), "Put on these suits before going for the Friday prayer. "

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 224:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "If Allah sends punishment upon a nation then it befalls
upon the whole population indiscriminately and then they will be
resurrected (and judged) according to their deeds. "

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 225:
Narrated Al-Hasan Al-Basri:
When Al-Hasan bin 'Ali moved with army units against Muawiya, 'Amr bin
AL-As said to Muawiya, "I see an army that will not retreat unless and until
the opposing army retreats." Muawiya said, "(If the Muslims are killed) who
will look after their children?" 'Amr bin Al-As said: I (will look after them). On
that, 'Abdullah bin 'Amir and 'Abdur-Rahman bin Samura said, "Let us meet
Muawaiya and suggest peace." Al-Hasan Al-Basri added: No doubt, I heard
that Abu Bakra said, "Once while the Prophet was addressing (the people),
Al-Hasan (bin 'Ali) came and the Prophet said, 'This son of mine is a chief,
and Allah may make peace between two groups of Muslims through him."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 226:
Narrated Harmala:
(Usama's Maula) Usama (bin Zaid) sent me to 'Ali (at Kufa) and said, "'Ali
will ask you, 'What has prevented your companion from joining me?' You
then should say to him, 'If you ('Ali) were in the mouth of a lion, I would like
to be with you, but in this matter I won't take any part.' " Harmala added:
"'Ali didn't give me anything (when I conveyed the message to him) so I
went to Hasan, Hussain and Ibn Ja'far and they loaded my camels with much
(wealth)."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 227:
Narrated Nafi':
When the people of Medina dethroned Yazid bin Muawiya, Ibn 'Umar
gathered his special friends and children and said, "I heard the Prophet
saying, 'A flag will be fixed for every betrayer on the Day of Resurrection,'
and we have given the oath of allegiance to this person (Yazid) in
accordance with the conditions enjoined by Allah and His Apostle and I do
not know of anything more faithless than fighting a person who has been
given the oath of allegiance in accordance with the conditions enjoined by
Allah and His Apostle , and if ever I learn that any person among you has
agreed to dethrone Yazid, by giving the oath of allegiance (to somebody
else) then there will be separation between him and me."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 228:
Narrated Abu Al-Minhal:
When Ibn Ziyad and Marwan were in Sham and Ibn Az-Zubair took over the
authority in Mecca and Qurra' (the Kharijites) revolted in Basra, I went out
with my father to Abu Barza Al-Aslami till we entered upon him in his house
while he was sitting in the shade of a room built of cane. So we sat with him
and my father started talking to him saying, "O Abu Barza! Don't you see in
what dilemma the people has fallen?" The first thing heard him saying "I
seek reward from Allah for myself because of being angry and scornful at
the Quraish tribe. O you Arabs! You know very well that you were in misery
and were few in number and misguided, and that Allah has brought you out
of all that with Islam and with Muhammad till He brought you to this state
(of prosperity and happiness) which you see now; and it is this worldly
wealth and pleasures which has caused mischief to appear among you. The
one who is in Sham (i.e., Marwan), by Allah, is not fighting except for the
sake of worldly gain: and those who are among you, by Allah, are not
fighting except for the sake of worldly gain; and that one who is in Mecca
(i.e., Ibn Az-Zubair) by Allah, is not fighting except for the sake of worldly
gain."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 229:
Narrated Abi Waih:
Hudhaifa bin Al-Yaman said, 'The hypocrites of today are worse than those
of the lifetime of the Prophet, because in those days they used to do evil
deeds secretly but today they do such deeds openly.'

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 230:
Narrated Abi Asha'sha:
Hudhaifa said, 'In fact, it was hypocrisy that existed in the lifetime of the
Prophet but today it is Kufr (disbelief) after belief.'

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 231:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The Hour will not be established till a man passes by a
grave of somebody and says, 'Would that I were in his place.' "

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 232:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The Hour will not be established till the buttocks of the
women of the tribe of Daus move while going round Dhi-al-Khalasa." Dhi-alKhalasa was the idol of the Daus tribe which they used to worship in the Pre
Islamic Period of ignorance.

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 233:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The Hour will not be established till a man from
Qahtan appears, driving the people with his stick."
Volume 9, Book 88, Number 234:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The Hour will not be established till a fire will come out
of the land of Hijaz, and it will throw light on the necks of the camels at
Busra."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 235:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Soon the river "Euphrates" will disclose the treasure
(the mountain) of gold, so whoever will be present at that time should not
take anything of it." Al-A'raj narrated from Abii Huraira that the Prophet said
the same but he said, "It (Euphrates) will uncover a mountain of gold (under
it)."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 236:
Narrated Haritha bin Wahb:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Give in charity because there will come a
time on the people when a person will go out with his alms from place to
place but will not find anybody to accept it."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 237:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The Hour will not be established (1) till two big groups
fight each other whereupon there will be a great number of casualties on
both sides and they will be following one and the same religious doctrine,
(2) till about thirty Dajjals (liars) appear, and each one of them will claim that
he is Allah's Apostle, (3) till the religious knowledge is taken away (by th
death of Religious scholars) (4) earthquakes will increase in number (5) time
will pass quickly, (6) afflictions will appear, (7) Al-Harj, (i.e., killing) will
increase, (8) till wealth will be in abundance ---- so abundant that a wealthy
person will worry lest nobody should accept his Zakat, and whenever he will
present it to someone, that person (to whom it will be offered) will say, 'I
am not in need of it, (9) till the people compete with one another in
constructing high buildings, (10) till a man when passing by a grave of
someone will say, 'Would that I were in his place (11) and till the sun rises
from the West. So when the sun will rise and the people will see it (rising
from the West) they will all believe (embrace Islam) but that will be the time
when: (As Allah said,) 'No good will it do to a soul to believe then, if it
believed not before, nor earned good (by deeds of righteousness) through
its Faith.' (6.158) And the Hour will be established while two men spreading
a garment in front of them but they will not be able to sell it, nor fold it up;
and the Hour will be established when a man has milked his she-camel and
has taken away the milk but he will not be able to drink it; and the Hour will
be established before a man repairing a tank (for his livestock) is able to
water (his animals) in it; and the Hour will be established when a person has
raised a morsel (of food) to his mouth but will not be able to eat it."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 238:
Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba:
Nobody asked the Prophet as many questions as I asked regarding Ad-Dajjal.
The Prophet said to me, "What worries you about him?" I said, "Because the
people say that he will have a mountain of bread and a river of water with
him (i.e. he will have abundance of food and water)" The Prophet said, "Nay,
he is too mean to be allowed such a thing by Allah"' (but it is only to test
mankind whether they believe in Allah or in Ad-Dajjal.)

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 239:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "Ad-Dajjal will come and encamp at a place close to
Medina and then Medina will shake thrice whereupon every Kafir
(disbeliever) and hypocrite will go out (of Medina) towards him."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 240:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
The Prophet said, "The terror caused by Al-Masih Ad-Dajjal will not enter
Medina and at that time Medina will have seven gates and there will be two
angels at each gate (guarding them).

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 241:
Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:
Allah's Apostle stood up amongst the people and then praised and glorified
Allah as He deserved and then he mentioned Ad-Dajjal, saying, "I warn you
of him, and there was no prophet but warned his followers of him; but I will
tell you something about him which no prophet has told his followers: AdDajjal is one-eyed whereas Allah is not."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 242:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said. "While I was sleeping, I saw myself (in a dream)
performing Tawaf around the Ka'ba. Behold, I saw a reddish-white man with
lank hair, and water was dropping from his head. I asked, "Who is this?' They
replied, 'The son of Mary.' Then I turned my face to see another man with a
huge body, red complexion and curly hair and blind in one eye. His eye
looked like a protruding out grape. They said (to me), He is Ad-Dajjal." The
Prophet added, "The man he resembled most is Ibn Qatan, a man from the
tribe of Khuza'a. "
Volume 9, Book 88, Number 243:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I heard Allah's Apostle in his prayer, seeking refuge with Allah from the
afflictions of Ad-Dajjal.

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 244:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
The Prophet said about Ad-Dajjal that he would have water and fire with
him: (what would seem to be) fire, would be cold water and (what would
seem to be) water, would be fire.

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 245:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "No prophet was sent but that he warned his followers
against the one-eyed liar (Ad-Dajjal). Beware! He is blind in one eye, and your
Lord is not so, and there will be written between his (Ad-Dajjal's) eyes (the
word) Kafir (i.e., disbeliever)." (This Hadith is also quoted by Abu Huraira
and Ibn 'Abbas).

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 246:
Narrated Abu Sa'id:
One day Allah's Apostle narrated to us a long narration about Ad-Dajjal and
among the things he narrated to us, was: "Ad-Dajjal will come, and he will be
forbidden to enter the mountain passes of Medina. He will encamp in one of
the salt areas neighboring Medina and there will appear to him a man who
will be the best or one of the best of the people. He will say 'I testify that
you are Ad-Dajjal whose story Allah's Apostle has told us.' Ad-Dajjal will say
(to his audience), 'Look, if I kill this man and then give him life, will you have
any doubt about my claim?' They will reply, 'No,' Then Ad-Dajjal will kill that
man and then will make him alive. The man will say, 'By Allah, now I
recognize you more than ever!' Ad-Dajjal will then try to kill him (again) but
he will not be given the power to do so."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 247:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "There are angels at the mountain passes of Medina (so
that) neither plague nor Ad-Dajjal can enter it.'

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 248:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet said, "Ad-Dajjal will come to Medina and find the angels
guarding it. So Allah willing, neither Ad-Dajjal, nor plague will be able to
come near it."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 249:
Narrated Zainab bint Jahsh:
That one day Allah's Apostle entered upon her in a state of fear and said,
"None has the right to be worshipped but Allah! Woe to the Arabs from the
Great evil that has approached (them). Today a hole has been opened in the
dam of Gog and Magog like this." The Prophet made a circle with his index
finger and thumb. Zainab bint Jahsh added: I said, "O Alllah's Apostle! Shall
we be destroyed though there will be righteous people among us?" The
Prophet said, "Yes, if the (number) of evil (persons) increased."

Volume 9, Book 88, Number 250:
Narrated Abu Huraira
The Prophet said, "A hole has been opened in the dam of Gog and Magog."
Wuhaib (the sub-narrator) made the number 90 (with his index finger and
thumb).
BOOK 89. JUDGMENTS (AHKAAM) (251-331)
Volume 9, Book 89, Number 251:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever obeys me, obeys Allah, and whoever
disobeys me, disobeys Allah, and whoever obeys the ruler I appoint, obeys
me, and whoever disobeys him, disobeys me."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 252:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Surely! Everyone of you is a guardian and is responsible
for his charges: The Imam (ruler) of the people is a guardian and is
responsible for his subjects; a man is the guardian of his family (household)
and is responsible for his subjects; a woman is the guardian of her husband's
home and of his children and is responsible for them; and the slave of a man
is a guardian of his master's property and is responsible for it. Surely,
everyone of you is a guardian and responsible for his charges."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 253:
Narrated Muhammad bin Jubair bin Mut'im:
That while he was included in a delegation of Quraish staying with Muawiya,
Muawiya heard that 'Abdullah bin 'Amr had said that there would be a king
from Qahtan tribe, whereupon he became very angry. He stood up, and
after glorifying and praising Allah as He deserved, said, "To proceed, I have
come to know that some of you men are narrating things which are neither
in Allah's Book, nor has been mentioned by Allah's Apostle . Such people are
the ignorant among you. Beware of such vain desires that mislead those
who have them. I have heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'This matter (of the
caliphate) will remain with the Quraish, and none will rebel against them,
but Allah will throw him down on his face as long as they stick to the rules
and regulations of the religion (Islam).'"

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 254:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "This matter (caliphate) will remain with the Quraish
even if only two of them were still existing."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 255:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "Do not wish to be like anyone, except in two cases: (1)
A man whom Allah has given wealth and he spends it righteously. (2) A man
whom Allah has given wisdom (knowledge of the Quran and the Hadith) and
he acts according to it and teaches it to others."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 256:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "You should listen to and obey, your ruler even if he
was an Ethiopian (black) slave whose head looks like a raisin."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 257:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "If somebody sees his Muslim ruler doing something he
disapproves of, he should be patient, for whoever becomes separate from
the Muslim group even for a span and then dies, he will die as those who
died in the Pre-lslamic period of ignorance (as rebellious sinners). (See
Hadith No. 176 and 177)
Volume 9, Book 89, Number 258:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "A Muslim has to listen to and obey (the order of his ruler)
whether he likes it or not, as long as his orders involve not one in
disobedience (to Allah), but if an act of disobedience (to Allah) is imposed
one should not listen to it or obey it. (See Hadith No. 203, Vol. 4)

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 259:
Narrated 'Ali:
The Prophet sent an army unit (for some campaign) and appointed a man
from the Ansar as its commander and ordered them (the soldiers) to obey
him. (During the campaign) he became angry with them and said, "Didn't
the Prophet order you to obey me?" They said, "Yes." He said, "I order you
to collect wood and make a fire and then throw yourselves into it." So they
collected wood and made a fire, but when they were about to throw
themselves into, it they started looking at each other, and some of them
said, "We followed the Prophet to escape from the fire. How should we
enter it now?" So while they were in that state, the fire extinguished and
their commander's anger abated. The event was mentioned to the Prophet
and he said, "If they had entered it (the fire) they would never have come
out of it, for obedience is required only in what is good." (See Hadith No.
629. Vol. 5)

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 260:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Samura:
The Prophet said, "O 'Abdur-Rahman! Do not seek to be a ruler, for if you are
given authority on your demand then you will be held responsible for it, but
if you are given it without asking (for it), then you will be helped (by Allah) in
it. If you ever take an oath to do something and later on you find that
something else is better, then you should expiate your oath and do what is
better."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 261:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Samura:
Allah's Apostle said, "O 'Abdur-Rahman bin Samura! Do not seek to be a
ruler, for if you are given authority on your demand, you will be held
responsible for it, but if you are given it without asking for it, then you will
be helped (by Allah) in it. If you ever take an oath to do something and later
on you find that something else is better, then do what is better and make
expiation for your oath."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 262:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "You people will be keen to have the authority of ruling
which will be a thing of regret for you on the Day of Resurrection. What an
excellent wet nurse it is, yet what a bad weaning one it is!"

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 263:
Narrated Abu Musa:
Two men from my tribe and I entered upon the Prophet. One of the two
men said to the Prophet, "O Allah's Apostle! Appoint me as a governor," and
so did the second. The Prophet said, "We do not assign the authority of
ruling to those who ask for it, nor to those who are keen to have it."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 264:
Narrated Ma'qil:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Any man whom Allah has given the authority of
ruling some people and he does not look after them in an honest manner,
will never feel even the smell of Paradise."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 265:
Narrated Ma'qil:
Allah's Apostle said, "If any ruler having the authority to rule Muslim
subjects dies while he is deceiving them, Allah will forbid Paradise for him."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 266:
Narrated Tarif Abi Tamima:
I saw Safwan and Jundab and Safwan's companions when Jundab was
advising. They said, "Did you hear something from Allah's Apostle?" Jundab
said, "I heard him saying, 'Whoever does a good deed in order to show off,
Allah will expose his intentions on the Day of Resurrection (before the
people), and whoever puts the people into difficulties, Allah will put him into
difficulties on the Day of Resurrection.'" The people said (to Jundab),
"Advise us." He said, "The first thing of the human body to purify is the
abdomen, so he who can eat nothing but good food (Halal and earned
lawfully) should do so, and he who does as much as he can that nothing
intervene between him and Paradise by not shedding even a handful of
blood, (i.e. murdering) should do so."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 267:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Apostle." The Prophet said, "You will be with the one whom you love."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 268:
Narrated Thabit Al-Bunani:
Anas bin Malik said to a woman of his family, "Do you know such-and-such a
woman?" She replied, "Yes." He said, "The Prophet passed by her while she
was weeping over a grave, and he said to her, 'Be afraid of Allah and be
patient.' The woman said (to the Prophet). 'Go away from me, for you do
not know my calamity.'" Anas added, "The Prophet left her and proceeded.
A man passed by her and asked her, 'What has Allah's Apostle said to you?'
She replied, 'I did not recognize him.' The man said, 'He was Allah's
Apostle."' Anas added, "So that woman came to the gate of the Prophet
and she did not find a gate-keeper there, and she said, 'O Allah's Apostle! By
Allah. I did not recognize you!' The Prophet said, 'No doubt, patience is at
the first stroke of a calamity.'"

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 269:
Narrated Anas:
Qais bin Sa'd was to the Prophet like a chief police officer to an Amir (chief).

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 270:
Narrated Abu Musa:
that the Prophet sent him and sent Mu'adh after him (as rulers to Yemen).

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 271:
Narrated Abu Musa:
A man embraced Islam and then reverted back to Judaism. Mu'adh bin Jabal
came and saw the man with Abu Musa. Mu'adh asked, "What is wrong with
this (man)?" Abu Musa replied, "He embraced Islam and then reverted back
to Judaism." Mu'adh said, "I will not sit down unless you kill him (as it is) the
verdict of Allah and His Apostle
Volume 9, Book 89, Number 272:
Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin Abi Bakra:
Abu Bakra wrote to his son who was in Sijistan: 'Do not judge between two
persons when you are angry, for I heard the Prophet saying, "A judge should
not judge between two persons while he is in an angry mood."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 273:
Narrated Abu Mas'ud Al-Ansari:
A man came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! By Allah, I fail to
attend the morning congregational prayer because so-and-so (i.e., Muadh
bin Jabal) prolongs the prayer when he leads us for it." I had never seen the
Prophet more furious in giving advice than he was on that day. He then said,
"O people! some of you make others dislike (good deeds, i.e. prayers etc).
So whoever among you leads the people in prayer, he should shorten it
because among them there are the old, the weak and the busy (needy
having some jobs to do). (See Hadith No. 90, Vol. 1)

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 274:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
That he had divorced his wife during her menses. 'Umar mentioned that to
the Prophet. Allah's Apostle became angry and said, "He must take her back
(his wife) and keep her with him till she becomes clean from her menses and
then to wait till she gets her next period and becomes clean again from it
and only then, if he wants to divorce her, he may do so."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 275:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Hind bint 'Utba bin Rabia came and said. "O Allah's Apostle! By Allah, there
was no family on the surface of the earth, I like to see in degradation more
than I did your family, but today there is no family on the surface of the
earth whom I like to see honored more than yours." Hind added, "Abu
Sufyan is a miser. Is it sinful of me to feed our children from his property?"
The Prophet said, "There is no blame on you if you feed them (thereof) in a
just and reasonable manner.

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 276:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
When the Prophet intended to write to the Byzantines, the people said,
"They do not read a letter unless it is sealed (stamped)." Therefore the
Prophet took a silver ring----as if I am looking at its glitter now----and its
engraving was: 'Muhammad, Apostle of Allah'

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 277:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin As-Sa'di:
That when he went to 'Umar during his Caliphate. 'Umar said to him,
"Haven't I been told that you do certain jobs for the people but when you
are given payment you refuse to take it?" 'Abdullah added: I said, "Yes."
'Umar said, "Why do you do so?" I said, "I have horses and slaves and I am
living in prosperity and I wish that my payment should be kept as a
charitable gift for the Muslims." 'Umar said, "Do not do so, for I intended to
do the same as you do. Allah's Apostles used to give me gifts and I used to
say to him, 'Give it to a more needy one than me.' Once he gave me some
money and I said, 'Give it to a more needy person than me,' whereupon the
Prophet said, 'Take it and keep it in your possession and then give it in
charity. Take what ever comes to you of this money if you are not keen to
have it and not asking for it; otherwise (i.e., if it does not come to you) do
not seek to have it yourself.' "
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: I have heard 'Umar saying, "The Prophet used
to give me some money (grant) and I would say (to him), 'Give it to a more
needy one than me.' Once he gave me some money and I said, 'Give it to a
more needy one than me.' The Prophet said (to me), 'Take it and keep it in
your possession and then give it in charity. Take whatever comes to you of
this money while you are not keen to have it and not asking for it; take it,
but you should not seek to have what you are not given. ' "

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 278:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:
I witnessed a husband and a wife who were involved in a case of Lian. Then
(the judgment of) divorce was passed. I was fifteen years of age, at that
time.

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 279:
Narrated Sahl:
(the brother of Bani Sa'ida) A man from the Ansar came to the Prophet and
said, "If a man finds another man sleeping with his wife, should he kill him?"
That man and his wife then did Lian in the mosque while I was present.

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 280:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A man came to Allah's Apostle while he was in the mosque, and called him,
saying, "O Allah's Apostle! I have committed illegal sexual intercourse." The
Prophet turned his face to the other side, but when the man gave four
witnesses against himself, the Prophet said to him, "Are you mad?" The man
said, "No." So the Prophet said (to his companions), "Take him away and
stone him to death. "
Volume 9, Book 89, Number 281:
Narrated Um Salama:
Allah's Apostle said, "I am only a human being, and you people (opponents)
come to me with your cases; and it may be that one of you can present his
case eloquently in a more convincing way than the other, and I give my
verdict according to what I hear. So if ever I judge (by error) and give the
right of a brother to his other (brother) then he (the latter) should not take
it, for I am giving him only a piece of Fire." (See Hadith No. 638, Vol. 3).

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 282:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
Allah's Apostle said on the Day of (the battle of) Hunain, "Whoever has
killed an infidel and has a proof or a witness for it, then the salb (arms and
belongings of that deceased) will be for him." I stood up to seek a witness
to testify that I had killed an infidel but I could not find any witness and then
sat down. Then I thought that I should mention the case to Allah's Apostle I
(and when I did so) a man from those who were sitting with him said, "The
arms of the killed person he has mentioned, are with me, so please satisfy
him on my behalf." Abu Bakr said, "No, he will not give the arms to a bird of
Quraish and deprive one of Allah's lions of it who fights for the cause of
Allah and His Apostle." Allah's Apostle I stood up and gave it to me, and I
bought a garden with its price, and that was my first property which I
owned through the war booty.
The people of Hijaz said, "A judge should not pass a judgment according to
his knowledge, whether he was a witness at the time he was the judge or
before that" And if a litigant gives a confession in favor of his opponent in
the court, in the opinion of some scholars, the judge should not pass a
judgment against him till the latter calls two witnesses to witness his
confession. And some people of Iraq said, "A judge can pass a judgement
according to what he hears or witnesses (the litigant's confession) in the
court itself, but if the confession takes place outside the court, he should
not pass the judgment unless two witnesses witness the confession." Some
of them said, "A judge can pass a judgement depending on his knowledge of
the case as he is trust-worthy, and that a witness is Required just to reveal
the truth. The judge's knowledge is more than the witness." Some said, "A
judge can judge according to his knowledge only in cases involving property,
but in other cases he cannot." Al-Qasim said, "A judge ought not to pass a
judgment depending on his knowledge if other people do not know what he
knows, although his knowledge is more than the witness of somebody else
because he might expose himself to suspicion by the Muslims and cause the
Muslims to have unreasonable doubt. "

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 283:
Narrated 'Ali bin Husain:
Safiya bint (daughter of) Huyai came to the Prophet (in the mosque), and
when she returned (home), the Prophet accompanied her. It happened that
two men from the Ansar passed by them and the Prophet called them
saying, "She is Safiya!" those two men said, "Subhan Allah!" The Prophet
said, "Satan circulates in the human body as blood does."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 284:
Narrated Abu Burda:
The Prophet sent my father and Mu'adh bin Jabal to Yemen and said (to
them), "Make things easy for the people and do not put hurdles in their way,
and give them glad tiding, and don't let them have aversion (i.e. to make
people to hate good deeds) and you both should work in cooperation and
mutual understanding" Abu Musa said to Allah's Apostle, "In our country a
special alcoholic drink called Al-Bit', is prepared (for drinking)." The Prophet
said, "Every intoxicant is prohibited. "

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 285:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "Set free the captives and accept invitations."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 286:
Narrated Abu Humaid Al-Sa'idi:
The Prophet appointed a man from the tribe of Bani Asad, called Ibn AlUtabiyya to collect the Zakat. When he returned (with the money) he said
(to the Prophet), "This is for you and this has been given to me as a gift."
The Prophet stood up on the pulpit (Sufyan said he ascended the pulpit),
and after glorifying and praising Allah, he said, "What is wrong with the
employee whom we send (to collect Zakat from the public) that he returns
to say, 'This is for you and that is for me?' Why didn't he stay at his father's
and mother's house to see whether he will be given gifts or not? By Him in
Whose Hand my life is, whoever takes anything illegally will bring it on the
Day of Resurrection by carrying it over his neck: if it is a camel, it will be
grunting: if it is a cow, it will be mooing: and if it is a sheep it will be
bleating!" The Prophet then raised both his hands till we saw the whiteness
of his armpits (and he said), "No doubt! Haven't I conveyed Allah's
Message?" And he repeated it three times.

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 287:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Salim, the freed salve of Abu Hudhaifa used to lead in prayer the early
Muhajirin (emigrants) and the companions of the Prophet in the Quba
mosque. Among those (who used to pray behind him) were Abu Bakr,
'Umar, Abu Salama, and Amir bin Rabi'a.

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 288:
Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair:
Marwan bin Al-Hakam and Al-Miswar bin Makhrama told him that when the
Muslims were permitted to set free the captives of Hawazin, Allah's Apostle
said, "I do not know who amongst you has agreed (to it) and who has not.
Go back so that your 'Urafa' may submit your decision to us." So the people
returned and their 'Urafa' talked to them and then came back to Allah's
Apostle and told him that the people had given their consent happily and
permitted (their captives to be freed).

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 289:
Narrated Muhammad bin Zaid bin Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Some people said to Ibn 'Umar, "When we enter upon our ruler(s) we say in
their praise what is contrary to what we say when we leave them." Ibn
'Umar said, "We used to consider this as hypocrisy."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 290:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostles said, "The worst of all mankind is the double-faced one,
who comes to some people with one countenance and to others, with
another countenance."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 291:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Hind (bint 'Utba) said to the Prophet "Abu Sufyan is a miserly man and I
need to take some money of his wealth." The Prophet said, "Take
reasonably what is sufficient for you and your children "

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 292:
Narrated Um Salama
(the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle heard some people quarreling at
the door of his dwelling, so he went out to them and said, "I am only a
human being, and litigants with cases of dispute come to me, and someone
of you may happen to be more eloquent (in presenting his case) than the
other, whereby I may consider that he is truthful and pass a judgment in his
favor. If ever I pass a judgment in favor of somebody whereby he takes a
Muslim's right unjustly, then whatever he takes is nothing but a piece of
Fire, and it is up to him to take or leave."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 293:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the wife of the Prophet) 'Utba bin Abi Waqqas said to his brother Sa'd bin
Abi Waqqas, "The son of the slave girl of Zam'a is from me, so take him into
your custody." So in the year of Conquest of Mecca, Sa'd took him and said.
(This is) my brother's son whom my brother has asked me to take into my
custody." 'Abd bin Zam'a got up before him and said, (He is) my brother and
the son of the slave girl of my father, and was born on my father's bed." So
they both submitted their case before Allah's Apostle. Sa'd said, "O Allah's
Apostle! This boy is the son of my brother and he entrusted him to me."
'Abd bin Zam'a said, "This boy is my brother and the son of the slave girl of
my father, and was born on the bed of my father." Allah's Apostle said, "The
boy is for you, O 'Abd bin Zam'a!" Then Allah's Apostle further said, "The
child is for the owner of the bed, and the stone is for the adulterer," He then
said to Sauda bint Zam'a, "Veil (screen) yourself before him," when he saw
the child's resemblance to 'Utba. The boy did not see her again till he met
Allah.

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 294:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "If somebody on the demand of a judge takes an oath to
grab (a Muslim's) property and he is liar in it, he will meet Allah Who will be
angry with him". So Allah revealed,:-'Verily! those who purchase a small gain at the cost of Allah's Covenant and
their oaths..' (3.77) 'Al-Ashath came while Abdullah was narrating (this) to
the people. Al-Ashath said, "This verse was revealed regarding me and
another man with whom I had a quarrel about a well. The Prophet said (to
me), "Do you have any evidence?' I replied, 'No.' He said, 'Let your opponent
take an oath.' I said: I am sure he would take a (false) oath." Thereupon it
was revealed: 'Verily! those who purchase a small gain at the cost of Allah's
Covenant....' (3.77) (See Hadith No. 72, Vol 6).

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 295:
Narrated Um Salama:
The Prophet heard the voices of some people quarreling near his gate, so he
went to them and said, "I am only a human being and litigants with cases of
disputes come to me, and maybe one of them presents his case eloquently
in a more convincing and impressive way than the other, and I give my
verdict in his favor thinking he is truthful. So if I give a Muslim's right to
another (by mistake), then that (property) is a piece of Fire, which is up to
him to take it or leave it." (See Hadith No. 281 )

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 296:
Narrated Jabir:
The Prophet came to know that one of his companions had given the
promise of freeing his slave after his death, but as he had no other property
than that slave, the Prophet sold that slave for 800 dirhams and sent the
price to him.

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 297:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle sent an army unit headed by Usama bin Zaid and the people
criticized his leadership. The Prophet said (to the people), "If you are
criticizing his leadership now, then you used to criticize his father's
leadership before. By Allah, he (Usama's father) deserved the leadership
and used to be one of the most beloved persons to me, and now his son
(Usama) is one of the most beloved persons to me after him. " (See Hadith
No. 745, Vol. 5)

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 298:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said, "The most hated person in the sight of Allah, is the
most quarrelsome person."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 299:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet sent (an army unit under the command of) Khalid bin Al-Walid
to fight against the tribe of Bani Jadhima and those people could not
express themselves by saying, "Aslamna," but they said, "Saba'na! Saba'na!
" Khalid kept on killing some of them and taking some others as captives,
and he gave a captive to everyone of us and ordered everyone of us to kill
his captive. I said, "By Allah, I shall not kill my captive and none of my
companions shall kill his captive!" Then we mentioned that to the Prophet
and he said, "O Allah! I am free from what Khalid bin Al-Walid has done," and
repeated it twice.

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 300:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd As-Saidi:
There was some quarrel (sighting) among Bani 'Amr, and when this news
reached the Prophet, he offered the Zuhr prayer and went to establish
peace among them. In the meantime the time of 'Asr prayer was due, Bilal
pronounced the Adhan and then the Iqama for the prayer and requested
Abu Bakr (to lead the prayer) and Abu Bakr went forward. The Prophet
arrived while Abu Bakr was still praying. He entered the rows of praying
people till he stood behind Abu Bakr in the (first) row. The people started
clapping, and it was the habit of Abu Bakr that whenever he stood for
prayer, he never glanced side-ways till he had finished it, but when Abu Bakr
observed that the clapping was not coming to an end, he looked and saw
the Prophet standing behind him.
The Prophet beckoned him to carry on by waving his hand. Abu Bakr stood
there for a while, thanking Allah for the saying of the Prophet and then he
retreated, taking his steps backwards. When the Prophet saw that, he went
ahead and led the people in prayer. When he finished the prayer, he said, "O
Abu Bakr! What prevented you from carrying on with the prayer after I
beckoned you to do so?" Abu Bakr replied, "It does not befit the son of Abi
Quhafa to lead the Prophet in prayer." Then the Prophet said to the people,
"If some problem arises during prayers, then the men should say, Subhan
Allah!; and the women should clap." (See Hadith No. 652, Vol. 1)

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 301:
Narrated Zaid bin Thabit:
Abu Bakr sent for me owing to the large number of casualties in the battle
of Al-Yamama, while 'Umar was sitting with him. Abu Bakr said (to me),
'Umar has come to my and said, 'A great number of Qaris of the Holy Quran
were killed on the day of the battle of Al-Yamama, and I am afraid that the
casualties among the Qaris of the Quran may increase on other battle-fields
whereby a large part of the Quran may be lost. Therefore I consider it
advisable that you (Abu Bakr) should have the Qur'an collected.' I said, 'How
dare I do something which Allah's Apostle did not do?' 'Umar said, By Allah,
it is something beneficial.' 'Umar kept on pressing me for that till Allah
opened my chest for that for which He had opened the chest of 'Umar and I
had in that matter, the same opinion as 'Umar had." Abu Bakr then said to
me (Zaid), "You are a wise young man and we do not have any suspicion
about you, and you used to write the Divine Inspiration for Allah's Apostle.
So you should search for the fragmentary scripts of the Quran and collect it
(in one Book)." Zaid further said: By Allah, if Abu Bakr had ordered me to
shift a mountain among the mountains from one place to another it would
not have been heavier for me than this ordering me to collect the Qur'an.
Then I said (to 'Umar and Abu Bakr), "How can you do something which
Allah's Apostle did not do?" Abu Bakr said, "By Allah, it is something
beneficial." Zaid added: So he (Abu Bakr) kept on pressing me for that until
Allah opened my chest for that for which He had opened the chests of Abu
Bakr and 'Umar, and I had in that matter, the same opinion as theirs.
So I started compiling the Quran by collecting it from the leafless stalks of
the date-palm tree and from the pieces of leather and hides and from the
stones, and from the chests of men (who had memorized the Quran). I
found the last verses of Sirat-at-Tauba: ("Verily there has come unto you an
Apostle (Muhammad) from amongst yourselves--' (9.128-129) ) from
Khuzaima or Abi Khuzaima and I added to it the rest of the Sura. The
manuscripts of the Quran remained with Abu Bakr till Allah took him unto
Him. Then it remained with 'Umar till Allah took him unto Him, and then with
Hafsa bint 'Umar.

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 302:
Narrated Abu Laila bin 'Abdullah bin Abdur-Rahman bin Sahl:
Sahl bin Abi Hathma and some great men of his tribe said, 'Abdullah bin
'Sahl and Muhaiyisa went out to Khaibar as they were struck with poverty
and difficult living conditions. Then Muhaiyisa was informed that Abdullah
had been killed and thrown in a pit or a spring. Muhaiyisa went to the Jews
and said, "By Allah, you have killed my companion." The Jews said, "By Allah,
we have not killed him." Muhaiyisa then came back to his people and told
them the story. He, his elder brother Huwaiyisa and 'Abdur-Rahman bin Sahl
came (to the Prophet) and he who had been at Khaibar, proceeded to
speak, but the Prophet said to Muhaiyisa, "The eldest! The eldest!" meaning,
"Let the eldest of you speak." So Huwaiyisa spoke first and then Muhaiyisa.
Allah's Apostle said, "The Jews should either pay the blood money of your
(deceased) companion or be ready for war." After that Allah's Apostle
wrote a letter to the Jews in that respect, and they wrote that they had not
killed him. Then Allah's Apostle said to Huwaiyisa, Muhaiyisa and 'AbdurRahman, "Can you take an oath by which you will be entitled to take the
blood money?" They said, "No." He said (to them), "Shall we ask the Jews to
take an oath before you?" They replied, "But the Jews are not Muslims." So
Allah's Apostle gave them one-hundred she-camels as blood money from
himself. Sahl added: When those she-camels were made to enter the house,
one of them kicked me with its leg.

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 303:
Narrated Abu Huraira and Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani:
A bedouin came and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Judge between us according
to Allah's Book (Laws)." His opponent stood up and said, "He has said the
truth, so judge between us according to Allah's Laws." The bedouin said,
"My son was a laborer for this man and committed illegal sexual intercourse
with his wife. The people said to me, 'Your son is to be stoned to death,' so I
ransomed my son for one hundred sheep and a slave girl. Then I asked the
religious learned men and they said to me, 'Your son has to receive one
hundred lashes plus one year of exile.' " The Prophet said, "I shall judge
between you according to Allah's Book (Laws)! As for the slave girl and the
sheep, it shall be returned to you, and your son shall receive one-hundred
lashes and be exiled for one year. O you, Unais!" The Prophet addressed
some man, "Go in the morning to the wife of this man and stone her to
death." So Unais went to her the next morning and stoned her to death.

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 304:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
That Abu Sufyan bin Harb told him that Heraclius had called him along with
the members of a Quraish caravan and then said to his interpreter, "Tell
them that I want to ask this (Abu Sufyan) a question, and if he tries to tell
me a lie, they should contradict him." Then Abu Sufyan mentioned the
whole narration and said that Heraclius said to the inter Peter, "Say to him
(Abu Sufyan), 'If what you say is true, then he (the Prophet) will take over
the place underneath my two feet.' "

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 305:
Narrated Abu Humaid As-Sa'idi:
The Prophet employed Ibn Al-Utbiyya to collect Zakat from Bani Sulaim, and
when he returned (with the money) to Allah's Apostle the Prophet called
him to account, and he said, "This (amount) is for you, and this was given to
me as a present." Allah's Apostle said, "Why don't you stay at your father's
house or your mother's house to see whether you will be given gifts or not,
if you are telling the truth?" Then Allah's Apostle stood up and addressed
the people, and after glorifying and praising Allah, he said: Amma Ba'du
(then after) I employ some men from among you for some job which Allah
has placed in my charge, and then one of you comes to me and says, 'This
(amount) is for you and this is a gift given to me.' Why doesn't he stay at the
house of his father or the house of his mother and see whether he will be
given gifts or not if he was telling the truth by Allah, none of you takes
anything of it (i.e., Zakat) for himself (Hisham added: unlawfully) but he will
meet Allah on the Day of Resurrection carrying it on his neck! I do not want
to see any of you carrying a grunting camel or a mooing cow or a bleating
sheep on meeting Allah." Then the Prophet raised both his hands till I saw
the whiteness of his armpits, and said, "(No doubt)! Haven't I conveyed
Allah's Message!"

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 306:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said, "Allah never sends a prophet or gives the Caliphate to a
Caliph but that he (the prophet or the Caliph) has two groups of advisors: A
group advising him to do good and exhorts him to do it, and the other group
advising him to do evil and exhorts him to do it. But the protected person
(against such evil advisors) is the one protected by Allah.' "

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 307:
Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit:
We gave the oath of allegiance to Allah's Apostle that we would listen to
and obey him both at the time when we were active and at the time when
we were tired and that we would not fight against the ruler or disobey him,
and would stand firm for the truth or say the truth wherever we might be,
and in the Way of Allah we would not be afraid of the blame of the blamers.
(See Hadith No. 178 and 320)

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 308:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet went out on a cold morning while the Muhajirin (emigrants)
and the Ansar were digging the trench. The Prophet then said, "O Allah! The
real goodness is the goodness of the Here after, so please forgive the Ansar
and the Muhajirin." They replied, "We are those who have given the Pledge
of allegiance to Muhammad for to observe Jihad as long as we remain
alive."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 309:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
Whenever we gave the Pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle for to listen to
and obey, he used to say to us, for as much as you can"
Volume 9, Book 89, Number 310:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Dinar:
I witnessed Ibn 'Umar when the people gathered around 'Abdul Malik. Ibn
'Umar wrote: I gave the Pledge of allegiance that I will listen to and obey
Allah's Slave, 'Abdul Malik, Chief of the believers according to Allah's Laws
and the Traditions of His Apostle as much as I can; and my sons too, give the
same pledge.'

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 311:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
I gave the Pledge of allegiance to the Prophet that I would listen and obey,
and he told me to add: 'As much as I can, and will give good advice to every
Muslim.'

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 312:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Dinar:
When the people took the oath of allegiance to 'Abdul Malik, 'Abdullah bin
'Umar wrote to him: "To Allah's Slave, 'Abdul Malik, Chief of the believers, I
give the Pledge of allegiance that I will listen to and obey Allah's Slave,
'Abdul Malik, Chief of the believers, according to Allah's Laws and the
Traditions of His Apostle in whatever is within my ability; and my sons too,
give the same pledge."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 313:
Narrated Yazid:
I said to Salama, "For what did you give the Pledge of allegiance to the
Prophet on the Day of Hudaibiya?" He replied, "For death."
Volume 9, Book 89, Number 314:
Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:
The group of people whom 'Umar had selected as candidates for the
Caliphate gathered and consulted each other. Abdur-Rahman said to them,
"I am not going to compete with you in this matter, but if you wish, I would
select for you a caliph from among you." So all of them agreed to let 'AbdurRahman decide the case. So when the candidates placed the case in the
hands of 'Abdur-Rahman, the people went towards him and nobody
followed the rest of the group nor obeyed any after him. So the people
followed 'Abdur-Rahman and consulted him all those nights till there came
the night we gave the oath of allegiance to 'Uthman. Al-Miswar (bin
Makhrama) added: 'Abdur-Rahman called on me after a portion of the night
had passed and knocked on my door till I got up, and he said to me, "I see
you have been sleeping! By Allah, during the last three nights I have not
slept enough. Go and call Az-Zubair and Sa'd.' So I called them for him and
he consulted them and then called me saying, 'Call 'Ali for me." I called 'Ali
and he held a private talk with him till very late at night, and then 'Al, got up
to leave having had much hope (to be chosen as a Caliph) but 'AbdurRahman was afraid of something concerning 'Ali. 'Abdur-Rahman then said
to me, "Call 'Uthman for me." I called him and he kept on speaking to him
privately till the Mu'adhdhin put an end to their talk by announcing the
Adhan for the Fajr prayer. When the people finished their morning prayer
and that (six men) group gathered near the pulpit, 'Abdur-Rahman sent for
all the Muhajirin (emigrants) and the Ansar present there and sent for the
army chief who had performed the Hajj with 'Umar that year. When all of
them had gathered, 'Abdur-Rahman said, "None has the right to be
worshipped but Allah," and added, "Now then, O 'Ali, I have looked at the
people's tendencies and noticed that they do not consider anybody equal to
'Uthman, so you should not incur blame (by disagreeing)." Then 'AbdurRahman said (to 'Uthman), "I gave the oath of allegiance to you on
condition that you will follow Allah's Laws and the traditions of Allah's
Apostle and the traditions of the two Caliphs after him." So 'Abdur-Rahman
gave the oath of allegiance to him, and so did the people including the
Muhajirin (emigrants) and the Ansar and the chiefs of the army staff and all
the Muslims.

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 315:
Narrated Salama:
We gave the oath of allegiance to the Prophet under the tree. He said to me,
"O Salama! Will you not give the oath of allegiance?" I replied, "O Allah's
Apostle! I have already given the oath of allegiance for the first time." He
said, (Give it again) for the second time.

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 316:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
A bedouin gave the Pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle for Islam and the
bedouin got a fever where upon he said to the Prophet "Cancel my Pledge."
But the Prophet refused. He came to him (again) saying, "Cancel my Pledge.'
But the Prophet refused. Then (the bedouin) left (Medina). Allah's Apostle
said: "Medina is like a pair of bellows (furnace): It expels its impurities and
brightens and clears its good."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 317:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Hisham:
who was born during the lifetime of the Prophet that his mother, Zainab
bint Humaid had taken him to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle!
Take his Pledge of allegiance (for Islam)." The Prophet said, "He ('Abdullah
bin Hisham) is a little child," and passed his hand over his head and invoked
Allah for him. 'Abdullah bin Hisham used to slaughter one sheep as a
sacrifice on behalf of all of his family.
Volume 9, Book 89, Number 318:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
A bedouin gave the Pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle for Islam. Then
the bedouin got fever at Medina, came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O
Allah's Apostle! Cancel my Pledge," But Allah's Apostle refused. Then he
came to him (again) and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Cancel my Pledge." But the
Prophet refused Then he came to him (again) and said, "O Allah's Apostle!
Cancel my Pledge." But the Prophet refused. The bedouin finally went out
(of Medina) whereupon Allah's Apostle said, "Medina is like a pair of bellows
(furnace): It expels its impurities and brightens and clears its good.

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 319:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "There will be three types of people whom Allah will
neither speak to them on the Day of Resurrection nor will purify them from
sins, and they will have a painful punishment: They are, (1) a man possessed
superfluous water (more than he needs) on a way and he withholds it from
the travelers. (2) a man who gives a pledge of allegiance to an Imam (ruler)
and gives it only for worldly benefits, if the Imam gives him what he wants,
he abides by his pledge, otherwise he does not fulfill his pledge; (3) and a
man who sells something to another man after the 'Asr prayer and swears
by Allah (a false oath) that he has been offered so much for it whereupon
the buyer believes him and buys it although in fact, the seller has not been
offered such a price." (See Hadith No. 838, Vol. 3)

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 320:
Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit:
Allah's Apostle said to us while we were in a gathering, "Give me the oath
(Pledge of allegiance for: (1) Not to join anything in worship along with
Allah, (2) Not to steal, (3) Not to commit illegal sexual intercourse, (4) Not to
kill your children, (5) Not to accuse an innocent person (to spread such an
accusation among people), (6) Not to be disobedient (when ordered) to do
good deeds. The Prophet added: Whoever amongst you fulfill his pledge, his
reward will be with Allah, and whoever commits any of those sins and
receives the legal punishment in this world for that sin, then that
punishment will be an expiation for that sin, and whoever commits any of
those sins and Allah does not expose him, then it is up to Allah if He wishes
He will punish him or if He wishes, He will forgive him." So we gave the
Pledge for that. (See Hadith No. 17, Vol. 1)

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 321:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to take the Pledge of allegiance from the women by
words only after reciting this Holy Verse:--(60.12) "..that they will not
associate anything in worship with Allah." (60.12) And the hand of Allah's
Apostle did not touch any woman's hand except the hand of that woman his
right hand possessed. (i.e. his captives or his lady slaves).

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 322:
Narrated Um Atiyya:
We gave the Pledge of allegiance to the Prophet and he recited to me the
verse (60.12). That they will not associate anything in worship with Allah
(60.12). And he also prevented us from wailing and lamenting over the dead.
A woman from us held her hand out and said, "Such-and-such a woman
cried over a dead person belonging to my family and I want to compensate
her for that crying" The Prophet did not say anything in reply and she left
and returned. None of those women abided by her pledge except Um
Sulaim, Um Al-'Ala', and the daughter of Abi Sabra, the wife of Al-Muadh or
the daughter of Abi Sabra, and the wife of Mu'adh.
Volume 9, Book 89, Number 323:
Narrated Jabir:
A bedouin came to the Prophet and said, "Please take my Pledge of
allegiance for Islam." So the Prophet took from him the Pledge of allegiance
for Islam. He came the next day with a fever and said to the Prophet "Cancel
my pledge." But the Prophet refused and when the bedouin went away, the
Prophet said, "Medina is like a pair of bellows (furnace): It expels its
impurities and brightens and clears its good."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 324:
Narrated Al-Qasim bin Muhammad:
'Aisha said, "O my head!" Allah's Apostle said, "If that (i.e., your death)
should happen while I am still alive, I would ask Allah to forgive you and
would invoke Allah for you." 'Aisha said, "O my life which is going to be lost!
By Allah, I think that you wish for my death, and if that should happen then
you would be busy enjoying the company of one of your wives in the last
part of that day." The Prophet said, "But I should say, 'O my head!' I feel like
calling Abu Bakr and his son and appoint (the former as my successors lest
people should say something or wish for something. Allah will insist (on Abu
Bakr becoming a Caliph) and the believers will prevent (anyone else from
claiming the Caliphate)," or "..Allah will prevent (anyone else from claiming
the Caliphate) and the believers will insist (on Abu Bakr becoming the
Caliph)."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 325:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
It was said to 'Umar, "Will you appoint your successor?" Umar said, "If I
appoint a Caliph (as my successor) it is true that somebody who was better
than I (i.e., Abu Bakr) did so, and if I leave the matter undecided, it is true
that somebody who was better than I (i.e., Allah's Apostle) did so." On this,
the people praised him. 'Umar said, "People are of two kinds: Either one
who is keen to take over the Caliphate or one who is afraid of assuming such
a responsibility. I wish I could be free from its responsibility in that I would
receive neither reward nor retribution I won't bear the burden of the
caliphate in my death as I do in my life."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 326:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
That he heard 'Umar's second speech he delivered when he sat on the pulpit
on the day following the death of the Prophet 'Umar recited the Tashahhud
while Abu Bakr was silent. 'Umar said, "I wish that Allah's Apostle had
outlived all of us, i.e., had been the last (to die). But if Muhammad is dead,
Allah nevertheless has kept the light amongst you from which you can
receive the same guidance as Allah guided Muhammad with that. And Abu
Bakr is the companion of Allah's Apostle He is the second of the two in the
cave. He is the most entitled person among the Muslims to manage your
affairs. Therefore get up and swear allegiance to him." Some people had
already taken the oath of allegiance to him in the shed of Bani Sa'ida but the
oath of allegiance taken by the public was taken at the pulpit. I heard 'Umar
saying to Abu Bakr on that day. "Please ascend the pulpit," and kept on
urging him till he ascended the pulpit whereupon, all the people swore
allegiance to him.

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 327:
Narrated Jubair bin Mut'im:
A woman came to the Prophet and spoke to him about something and he
told her to return to him. She said, "O Allah's Apostle! If I come and do not
find you?" (As if she meant, "...if you die?") The Prophet said, "If you should
not find me, then go to Abu Bakr."
Volume 9, Book 89, Number 328:
Narrated Tariq bin Shihab:
Abu Bakr said to the delegate of Buzakha. "Follow the tails of the camels till
Allah shows the Caliph (successor) of His Prophet and Al-Muhajirin
(emigrants) something because of which you may excuse yourselves "

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 329:
Narrated Jabir bin Samura:
I heard the Prophet saying, "There will be twelve Muslim rulers (who will
rule all the Islamic world)." He then said a sentence which I did not hear. My
father said, "All of them (those rulers) will be from Quraish."

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 330:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "By Him in Whose Hands my life is, I was about to order
for collecting fire wood and then order someone to pronounce the Adhan
for the prayer and then order someone to lead the people in prayer and
then I would go from behind and burn the houses of men who did not
present themselves for the (compulsory congregational) prayer. By Him in
Whose Hands my life is, if anyone of you had known that he would receive a
bone covered with meat or two (small) pieces of meat present in between
two ribs, he would come for 'Isha' prayer." (See Hadith No. 617, Vol. 1)

Volume 9, Book 89, Number 331:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Ka'b bin Malik:
Who was Ka'b's guide from among his sons when Ka'b became blind: I heard
Ka'b bin Malik saying, "When some people remained behind and did not join
Allah's Apostle in the battle of Tabuk.." and then he described the whole
narration and said, "Allah's Apostle forbade the Muslims to speak to us, and
so we (I and my companions) stayed fifty nights in that state, and then
Allah's Apostle announced Allah's acceptance of our repentance."
BOOK 90. WISHES (332-351)
Volume 9, Book 90, Number 332:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "By Him in Whose Hands my life is! Were it not
for some men who dislike to be left behind and for whom I do not have
means of conveyance, I would not stay away (from any Holy Battle). I would
love to be martyred in Allah's Cause and come to life and then get, martyred
and then come to life and then get martyred and then get resurrected and
then get martyred.

Volume 9, Book 90, Number 333:
Narrated Al-A'rai:
Abu Huraira said, Allah's Apostle said, "By Him in Whose Hand my life is, I
would love to fight in Allah's Cause and then get martyred and then
resurrected (come to life) and then get martyred and then resurrected
(come to life) and then get martyred, and then resurrected (come to life)
and then get martyred and then resurrected (come to life)." Abu Huraira
used to repeat those words three times and I testify to it with Allah's Oath.

Volume 9, Book 90, Number 334:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "If I had gold equal to the mountain of Uhud, I would love
that, before three days had passed, not a single Dinar thereof remained with
me if I found somebody to accept it excluding some amount that I would
keep for the payment of my debts.''

Volume 9, Book 90, Number 335:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said, "If I had formerly known hat I came to know lately, I
would not have driven the Hadi with me and would have finished the state
of Ihram along with the people when they finished it

Volume 9, Book 90, Number 336:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
We were in the company of Allah's Apostle and we assumed the state of
Ihram of Hajj and arrived at Mecca on the fourth of Dhul-Hijja. The Prophet
ordered us to perform the Tawaf around the Ka'ba and (Sa'i) between AsSafa and Al-Marwa and use our lhram just for 'Umra, and finish the state of
Ihram unless we had our Hadi with us. None of us had the Hadi with him
except the Prophet and Talha. 1AIj came from Yemen and brought the Hadi
with him. 'Ali said, 'I had assumed the state of Ihram with the same intention
as that with which Allah's Apostle had assumed it. The people said, "How
can we proceed to Mina and our male organs are dribbling?" Allah's Apostle
said, "If I had formerly known what I came to know latterly, I would not
have brought the Hadi, and had there been no Hadi with me, I would have
finished my Ihram." Suraqa (bin Malik) met the Prophet while he was
throwing pebbles at the Jamrat-al-'Aqaba, and asked, "O Allah's Apostle! Is
this (permitted) for us only?" The Prophet replied. "No, it is forever" 'Aisha
had arrived at Mecca while she was menstruating, therefore the Prophet
ordered her to perform all the ceremonies of Hajj except the Tawaf around
the Ka'ba, and not to perform her prayers unless and until she became clean
. When they encamped at Al-Batha, 'Aisha said, "O Allah's Apostle! You are
proceeding after performing both Hajj and 'Umra while I am proceeding
with Hajj only?" So the Prophet ordered 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr AsSiddiq to go with her to At-Tan'im, and so she performed the 'Umra in DhulHijja after the days of the Hajj.

Volume 9, Book 90, Number 337:
Narrated Aisha:
One night the Prophet was unable to sleep and said, "Would that a
righteous man from my companions guarded me tonight." Suddenly we
heard the clatter of arms, whereupon the Prophet said, "Who is it?" It was
said, "I am Sa'd, O Allah's Apostle! I have come to guard you." The Prophet
then slept so soundly that we heard him snoring. Abu 'Abdullah said: 'Aisha
said: Bilal said, "Would that I but stayed overnight in a valley with Idhkhir
and Jalil (two kinds of grass) around me (i.e., in Mecca)." Then I told that to
the Prophet .

Volume 9, Book 90, Number 338:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Not to wish to be the like except of two men. A man
whom Allah has given the (knowledge of the) Qur'an and he recites it during
the hours of night and day and the one who wishes says: If I were given the
same as this (man) has been given, I would do what he does, and a man
whom Allah has given wealth and he spends it in the just and right way, in
which case the one who wishes says, 'If I were given the same as he has
been given, I would do what he does.' " (See Hadith No. 543 and 544, Vol 6)

Volume 9, Book 90, Number 339:
Narrated Anas:
If I had not heard the Prophet saying, "You should not long for death," I
would have longed (for it).

Volume 9, Book 90, Number 340:
Narrated Qais:
We went to pay a visit to Khabbab bin Al-Art and he had got himself branded
at seven spots over his body. He said, "If Allah's Apostle had not forbidden
us to invoke Allah for death, I would have invoked for it."

Volume 9, Book 90, Number 341:
Narrated Sa'd bin Ubaid:
(the Maula of 'Abdur-Rahman bin Azhar) Allah's Apostle said, "None of you
should long for death, for if he is a good man, he may increase his good
deeds, and if he is an evil-doer, he may stop the evil deeds and repent."

Volume 9, Book 90, Number 342:
Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib:
The Prophet was carrying earth with us on the day of the battle of Al-Ahzab
(confederates) and I saw that the dust was covering the whiteness of his
abdomen, and he (the Prophet ) was saying, "(O Allah) ! Without You, we
would not have been guided, nor would we have given in charity, nor would
we have prayed. So (O Allah!) please send tranquility (Sakina) upon us as
they, (the chiefs of the enemy tribes) have rebelled against us. And if they
intend affliction (i.e. want to frighten us and fight against us) then we would
not (flee but withstand them). And the Prophet used to raise his voice with
it. (See Hadith No. 430 and 432, Vol. 5)

Volume 9, Book 90, Number 343:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa:
Allah's Apostle said, "Do not long for meeting your enemy, and ask Allah for
safety (from all sorts of evil)." (See Hadith No. 266, Vol. 4)

Volume 9, Book 90, Number 344:
Narrated Al-Qasim bin Muhammad:
Ibn 'Abbas mentioned the case of a couple on whom the judgment of Lian
has been passed. 'Abdullah bin Shaddad said, "Was that the lady in whose
case the Prophet said, "If I were to stone a lady to death without a proof
(against her)?' "Ibn 'Abbas said, "No! That was concerned with a woman
who though being a Muslim used to arouse suspicion by her outright
misbehavior." (See Hadith No. 230, Vol.7)

Volume 9, Book 90, Number 345:
Narrated 'Ata:
One night the Prophet delayed the Isha' prayer whereupon 'Umar went to
him and said, "The prayer, O Allah's Apostle! The women and children had
slept." The Prophet came out with water dropping from his head, and said,
"Were I not afraid that it would be hard for my followers (or for the people),
I would order them to pray Isha prayer at this time." (Various versions of this
Hadith are given by the narrators with slight differences in expression but
not in content).

Volume 9, Book 90, Number 346:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Were I not afraid that it would be hard on my
followers, I would order them to use the siwak (as obligatory, for cleaning
the teeth)

Volume 9, Book 90, Number 347:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet fasted Al-Wisal on the last days of the month. Some people did
the same, and when the news reached the Prophet he said, "If the month
had been prolonged for me, then I would have fasted Wisal for such a long
time that the most exaggerating ones among you would have given up their
exaggeration. I am not like you; my Lord always makes me eat and drink."

Volume 9, Book 90, Number 348:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle forbade Al-Wisal. The people said (to him), "But you fast Al'Wisal," He said, "Who among you is like me? When I sleep (at night), my
Lord makes me eat and drink. But when the people refused to give up AlWisal, he fasted Al-Wisal along with them for two days and then they saw
the crescent whereupon the Prophet said, "If the crescent had not appeared
I would have fasted for a longer period," as if he intended to punish them
herewith.

Volume 9, Book 90, Number 349:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I asked the Prophet about the wall (outside the Ka'ba). "Is it regarded as
part of the Ka'ba?" He replied, "Yes." I said, "Then why didn't the people
include it in the Ka'ba?" He said, "(Because) your people ran short of
money." I asked, "Then why is its gate so high?" He replied, ''Your people did
so in order to admit to it whom they would and forbid whom they would.
Were your people not still close to the period of ignorance, and were I not
afraid that their hearts might deny my action, then surely I would include the
wall in the Ka'ba and make its gate touch the ground."

Volume 9, Book 90, Number 350:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "But for the emigration, I would have been one of the
Ansar: and if the people took their way in a valley (or a mountain pass), I
would take the Ansar's valley or the mountain pass."
Volume 9, Book 90, Number 351:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid:
The Prophet said, "But for the emigration, I would have been one of the
Ansar; and if the people took their way in a valley (or a mountain pass), I
would take Ansar's valley or their mountain pass."
BOOK 91. ACCEPTING INFORMATION GIVEN BY A TRUTHFUL PERSON (352-372)
Volume 9, Book 91, Number 352:
Narrated Malik:
We came to the Prophet and we were young men nearly of equal ages and
we stayed with him for twenty nights. Allah's Apostle was a very kind man
and when he realized our longing for our families, he asked us about those
whom we had left behind. When we informed him, he said, "Go back to your
families and stay with them and teach them (religion) and order them (to do
good deeds). The Prophet mentioned things some of which I remembered
and some I did not. Then he said, "Pray as you have seen me praying, and
when it is the time of prayer, one of you should pronounce the call (Adhan)
for the prayer and the eldest of you should lead the prayer. "

Volume 9, Book 91, Number 353:
Narrated Ibn Mas'ud:
Allah's Apostle said, "The (call for prayer) Adhan of Bilal should not stop
anyone of you from taking his Suhur for he pronounces the Adhan in order
that whoever among you is praying the night prayer, may return (to eat his
Suhur) and whoever among you is sleeping, may get up, for it is not yet
dawn (when it is like this)." (Yahya, the sub-narrator stretched his two index
fingers side ways).

Volume 9, Book 91, Number 354:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "Bilal pronounces the Adhan at night so that you may eat
and drink till Ibn Um Maktum pronounces the Adhan (for the Fajr prayer)."
Volume 9, Book 91, Number 355:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet led us in Zuhr prayer and prayer five Rakat. Somebody asked
him whether the prayer had been increased." He (the Prophet ) said, "And
what is that?" They (the people) replied, "You have prayed five Rakat." Then
the Prophet offered two prostrations (of Sahu) after he had finished his
prayer with the Taslim.

Volume 9, Book 91, Number 356:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle finished his prayer after offerings two Rakat only. DhulYaddain asked him whether the prayer had been reduced, or you had
forgotten?" The Prophet said, "Is Dhul-Yaddain speaking the truth?" The
people said, "Yes." Then Allah's Apostle stood up and performed another
two Rakat and then finished prayer with Taslim, and then said the Takbir and
performed a prostration similar to or longer than his ordinary prostrations;
then he raised his head, said Takbir and prostrated and then raised his head
(Sahu prostrations).

Volume 9, Book 91, Number 357:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
While the people were at Quba offering the morning prayer, suddenly a
person came to them saying, "Tonight Divine Inspiration has been revealed
to Allah's Apostle and he has been ordered to face the Ka'ba (in prayers):
therefore you people should face it." There faces were towards Sham, so
they turned their faces towards the Ka'ba (at Mecca).

Volume 9, Book 91, Number 358:
Narrated Al-Bara':
When Allah's Apostle arrived at Medina, he prayed facing Jerusalem for
sixteen or seventeen months but he wished that he would be ordered to
face the Ka'ba. So Allah revealed: -'Verily! We have seen the turning of your face towards the heaven; surely we
shall turn you to a prayer direction (Qibla) that shall please you.' (2.144) Thus
he was directed towards the Ka'ba. A man prayed the 'Asr prayer with the
Prophet and then went out, and passing by some people from the Ansar, he
said, "I testify. that I have prayed with the Prophet and he (the Prophet) has
prayed facing the Ka'ba." Thereupon they, who were bowing in the 'Asr
prayer, turned towards the Ka'ba.

Volume 9, Book 91, Number 359:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
I used to offer drinks prepared from infused dates to Abu Talha Al-Ansari,
Abu 'Ubada bin Al Jarrah and Ubai bin Ka'b. Then a person came to them
and said, "All alcoholic drinks have been prohibited." Abii Talha then said, "O
Anas! Get up and break all these jars." So I got up and took a mortar
belonging to us, and hit the jars with its lower part till they broke.

Volume 9, Book 91, Number 360:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
The Prophet said to the people of Najran, "I will send to you an honest
person who is really trustworthy." The Companion, of the Prophet each
desired to be that person, but the Prophet sent Abu 'Ubaida.

Volume 9, Book 91, Number 361:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "For every nation there is an Amin (honest, trustworthy
person) and the Amin of this nation is Abu 'Ubaida."
Volume 9, Book 91, Number 362:
Narrated 'Umar:
There was a man from the Ansar (who was a friend of mine). If he was not
present in the company of Allah's Apostle I used to be present with Allah's
Apostle, I would tell him what I used to hear from Allah's Apostle, and when
I was absent from Allah's Apostle he used to be present with him, and he
would tell me what he used to hear from Allah's Apostle .

Volume 9, Book 91, Number 363:
Narrated Ali:
The Prophet , sent an army and appointed some man their commander The
man made a fire and then said (to the soldiers), "Enter it." Some of them
intended to enter it while some others said, 'We have run away from it (i.e.,
embraced Islam to save ourselves from the 'fire')." They mentioned that to
the Prophet, and he said about people who had intended to enter the fire.
''If they had entered it, they would have remained In it till the Day of
Resurrection.'' Then he said to others, "No obedience for evil deeds,
obedience is required only in what is good ."

Volume 9, Book 91, Number 364:
Narrated Abu Huraira and Zaid bin Khalid:
Two men sued each other before the Prophet.

Volume 9, Book 91, Number 365:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
While we were with Allah's Apostle a bedouin got up and said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Settle my case according to Allah's Book (Laws)." Then hi
opponent got up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! He has said the truth! Settle
his case according to Allah's Book (Laws.) and allow me to speak," He said,
"My son was a laborer for this man and he committed illegal sexual
intercourse with his wife. The people told me that my son should be stoned
to death but I ransomed him with one-hundred sheep and a slave girl. Then I
asked the religious learned people and they told me that his wife should be
stoned to death and my son should receive one-hundred lashes and be
sentenced to one year of exile.' The Prophet said, "By Him in Whose Hands
my life is, I will judge between you according to Allah's Book (Laws): As for
the slave girl and the sheep, they are to be returned; and as for your son, he
shall receive one-hundred lashes and will be exiled for one year. You, O
Unais!" addressing a man from Bani Aslam, "Go tomorrow morning to the
wife of this (man) and if she confesses, then stone her to death." The next
morning Unais went to the wife and she confessed, and he stoned her to
death.

Volume 9, Book 91, Number 366:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
On the day of (the battle of) the Trench, the Prophet called the people (to
bring news about the enemy). Az-Zubair responded to his call. He called
them again and Az-Zubair responded to his call again; then he called them
for the third time and again Az-Zubair responded to his call whereupon the
Prophet said, "Every prophet has his Hawairi (helper), and Az-Zubair is my
Hawari."

Volume 9, Book 91, Number 367:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet entered a garden and told me to guard its gate. Then a man
came and asked permission to enter. The Prophet, said, "Permit him and
give him the good news that he will enter Paradise." Behold! It was Abu
Bakr. Then 'Umar came, and the Prophet said, "Admit him and give him the
good news that he will enter Paradise." Then 'Uthman came and the
Prophet said, "Admit him and give him the good news that he will enter
Paradise. "

Volume 9, Book 91, Number 368:
Narrated 'Umar:
I came and behold, Allah's Apostle was staying on a Mashroba (attic room)
and a black slave of Allah's Apostle was at the top if its stairs. I said to him,
"(Tell the Prophet) that here is 'Umar bin Al-Khattab (asking for permission
to enter)." Then he admitted me.

Volume 9, Book 91, Number 369:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle sent a letter to Khosrau and told his messenger to give it first
to the ruler of Bahrain, and tell him to deliver it to Khosrau. When Khosrau
had read it, he tore it into pieces. (Az-Zuhri said: I think Ibn Al-Musaiyab said,
"Allah's Apostle invoked Allah to tear them (Khosrau and his followers) into
pieces."

Volume 9, Book 91, Number 370:
Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa':
Allah's Apostle said to a man from the tribe of Al-Aslam, "Proclaim among
your people (or the people) on the day of 'Ashura' (tenth of Muharram),
'Whosoever has eaten anything should fast for the rest of the day; and
whoever has not eaten anything, should complete his fast.' "

Volume 9, Book 91, Number 371:
Narrated Ibn Abbas
When the delegate of 'Abd Al-Qais came to Allah's Apostle, he said, "Who
are the delegate?" They said, "The delegate are from the tribe of Rabi'a."
The Prophet said, "Welcome, O the delegate, and welcome! O people!
Neither you will have any disgrace nor will you regret." They said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Between you and us there are the infidels of the tribe of Mudar, so
please order us to do something good (religious deeds) that by acting on
them we may enter Paradise, and that we may inform (our people) whom
we have left behind, about it." They also asked (the Prophet) about drinks.
He forbade them from four things and ordered them to do four things. He
ordered them to believe in Allah, and asked them, "Do you know what is
meant by belief in Allah?" They said, "Allah and His Apostle know best." He
said, ''To testify that none has the right to be worshipped except Allah, the
One, Who has no partners with Him, and that Muhammad is Allah's Apostle;
and to offer prayers perfectly and to pay Zakat." (the narrator thinks that
fasting in Ramadan is included), "and to give one-fifth of the war booty (to
the state)." Then he forbade four (drinking utensils): Ad-Duba', Al-Hantam,
Al-Mazaffat and An-Naqir, or probably, Al-Muqaiyar. And then the Prophet
said, "Remember all these things by heart and preach it to those whom you
have left behind."

Volume 9, Book 91, Number 372:
Narrated Tauba Al-'Anbari:
Ash-'Sha'bi asked me, "Did you notice how Al-Hasan used to narrate Hadiths
from the Prophets? I stayed with Ibn 'Umar for about two or one-and-half
years and I did not hear him narrating any thing from the Prophet except his
(Hadith): He (Ibn 'Umar) said, "Some of the companions of the Prophet
including Sa'd, were going to eat meat, but one of the wives of the Prophet
called them, saying, 'It is the neat of a Mastigure.' The people then stopped
eating it. On that Allah's Apostle said, 'Carry on eating, for it is lawful.' Or
said, 'There is no harm in eating it, but it is not from my meals."
BOOK 92. HOLDING FAST TO THE QUR'AN AND SUNNAH (373-468)
Volume 9, Book 92, Number 373:
Narrated Tariq bin Shihab:
A Jew said to 'Umar, "O Chief of the Believers, if this verse: 'This day I have
perfected your religion for you, completed My favors upon you, and have
chosen for you, Islam as your religion.' (5.3) had been revealed upon us, we
would have taken that day as an 'Id (festival) day." 'Umar said, "I know
definitely on what day this Verse was revealed; it was revealed on the day of
'Arafat, on a Friday."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 374:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
That he heard 'Umar speaking while standing on the pulpit of the Prophet in
the morning (following the death of the Prophet), when the people had
sworn allegiance to Abu Bakr. He said the Tashah-hud before Abu Bakr, and
said, "Amma Ba'du (then after) Allah has chosen for his Apostle what is with
Him (Paradise) rather than what is with you (the world). This is that Book
(Quran) with which Allah guided your Apostle, so stick to it, for then you will
be guided on the right path as Allah guided His Apostle with it."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 375:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet embraced me and said, "O Allah! Teach him (the knowledge of)
the Book (Quran)."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 376:
Narrated Abal Minhal:
Abu Barza said, "(O people!) Allah makes you self-sufficient or has raised you
high with Islam and with Muhammad

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 377:
Narrated Abdullah bin Dinar:
'Abdullah Bin 'Umar wrote to 'Abdul Malik bin Marwan, swearing allegiance
to him: 'I swear allegiance to you in that I will listen and obey what is in
accordance with the Laws of Allah and the Tradition of His Apostle as much
as I can.'

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 378:
Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab:
Abu Huraira said that Allah's Apostle said, "I have been sent with 'Jawami-alKalim ' (the shortest expression with the widest meaning) and have been
made victorious with awe (cast in my enemy's hearts), and while I was
sleeping, I saw that the keys of the treasures of the world were placed in my
hand." Abu Huraira added: Allah's Apostle has gone, and you people are
utilizing those treasures, or digging those treasures out." or said a similar
sentence.

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 379:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "There was no prophet among the prophets but was
given miracles because of which people had security or had belief, but what
I was given was the Divine Inspiration which Allah revealed to me. So I hope
that my followers will be more than those of any other prophet on the Day
of Resurrection."
Volume 9, Book 92, Number 380:
Narrated Abu Wail:
I sat with Shaiba in this Mosque (Al-Masjid-Al-Haram), and he said, "'Umar
once sat beside me here as you are now sitting, and said, 'I feel like
distributing all the gold and silver that are in it (i.e., the Ka'ba) among the
Muslims'. I said, 'You cannot do that.' 'Umar said, 'Why?' I said, 'Your two
(previous) companions (the Prophet and Abu Bakr) did not do it. 'Umar said,
'They are the two persons whom one must follow.'" (See Hadith No. 664,
Vol. 2)

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 381:
Narrated Hudhaifa:
Allah's Apostle said to us, "Honesty descended from the Heavens and
settled in the roots of the hearts of men (faithful believers), and then the
Quran was revealed and the people read the Quran, (and learnt it from it)
and also learnt it from the Sunna." Both Quran and Sunna strengthened
their (the faithful believers') honesty. (See Hadith No. 208)

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 382:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The best talk (speech) is Allah's Book 'Quran), and the best way is the way
of Muhammad, and the worst matters are the heresies (those new things
which are introduced into the religion); and whatever you have been
promised will surely come to pass, and you cannot escape (it).

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 383:
Narrated Abu Huraira and Zaid bin Khalid:
We were with the Prophet when he said (to two men), "I shall judge
between you according to Allah's Book (Laws)."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 384:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "All my followers will enter Paradise except those who
refuse." They said, "O Allah's Apostle! Who will refuse?" He said, "Whoever
obeys me will enter Paradise, and whoever disobeys me is the one who
refuses (to enter it)."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 385:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
Some angels came to the Prophet while he was sleeping. Some of them said,
"He is sleeping." Others said, "His eyes are sleeping but his heart is awake."
Then they said, "There is an example for this companion of yours." One of
them said, "Then set forth an example for him." Some of them said, "He is
sleeping." The others said, "His eyes are sleeping but his heart is awake."
Then they said, "His example is that of a man who has built a house and then
offered therein a banquet and sent an inviter (messenger) to invite the
people. So whoever accepted the invitation of the inviter, entered the house
and ate of the banquet, and whoever did not accept the invitation of the
inviter, did not enter the house, nor did he eat of the banquet." Then the
angels said, "Interpret this example to him so that he may understand it."
Some of them said, "He is sleeping.'' The others said, "His eyes are sleeping
but his heart is awake." And then they said, "The houses stands for Paradise
and the call maker is Muhammad; and whoever obeys Muhammad, obeys
Allah; and whoever disobeys Muhammad, disobeys Allah. Muhammad
separated the people (i.e., through his message, the good is distinguished
from the bad, and the believers from the disbelievers)."
Volume 9, Book 92, Number 386:
Narrated Hammam:
Hudhaifa said, "O the Group of Al-Qurra! Follow the straight path, for then
you have taken a great lead (and will be the leaders), but if you divert right
or left, then you will go astray far away."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 387:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, "My example and the example of what I have been sent
with is that of a man who came to some people and said, 'O people! I have
seen the enemy's army with my own eyes, and I am the naked warner; so
protect yourselves!' Then a group of his people obeyed him and fled at night
proceeding stealthily till they were safe, while another group of them
disbelieved him and stayed at their places till morning when the army came
upon them, and killed and ruined them completely So this is the example of
that person who obeys me and follows what I have brought (the Quran and
the Sunna), and the example of the one who disobeys me and disbelieves
the truth I have brought."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 388:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
When Allah's Apostle died and Abu Bakr was elected as a Caliph after him,
some of the Arabs reverted to disbelief, 'Umar said to Abu Bakr, "How dare
you fight the people while Allah's Apostle said, I have been ordered to fight
the people till they say 'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah' And
whoever says: None has the right to be worshipped but Allah.' waves his
wealth and his life from me unless he deserves a legal punishment lusty, and
his account will be with Allah! Abu Bakr said, "By Allah, I will fight him who
discriminates between Zakat and prayers, for Zakat is the Compulsory right
to be taken from the wealth By Allah, if they refuse to give me even a tying
rope which they use to give to Allah's Apostle, I would fight them for
withholding it." 'Umar said, 'By Allah, It was nothing, except I saw that Allah
had opened the chest of Abu Bakr to the fight, and I came to know for
certain that was the truth."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 389:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:
Uyaina bin Hisn bin Hudhaifa bin Badr came and stayed (at Medina) with his
nephew Al-Hurr bin Qais bin Hisn who has one of those whom 'Umar used to
keep near him, as the Qurra' (learned men knowing Quran by heart) were
the people of Umar's meetings and his advisors whether they were old or
young. 'Uyaina said to his nephew, "O my nephew! Have you an approach to
this chief so as to get for me the permission to see him?" His nephew said, "I
will get the permission for you to see him." (Ibn 'Abbas added: ) So he took
the permission for 'Uyaina, and when the latter entered, he said, "O the son
of Al-Khattab! By Allah, you neither give us sufficient provision nor judge
among us with justice." On that 'Umar became so furious that he intended
to harm him. Al-Hurr, said, "O Chief of the Believers!" Allah said to His
Apostle 'Hold to forgiveness, command what is good (right), and leave the
foolish (i.e. do not punish them).' (7.199) and this person is among the
foolish." By Allah, 'Umar did not overlook that Verse when Al-Hurr recited it
before him, and 'Umar said to observe (the orders of) Allah's Book strictly."
(See Hadith No. 166, Vol. 6)

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 390:
Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr:
I came to 'Aisha during the solar eclipse. The people were standing (offering
prayer) and she too, was standing and offering prayer. I asked, "What is
wrong with the people?" She pointed towards the sky with her hand and
said, Subhan Allah!'' I asked her, "Is there a sign?" She nodded with her head
meaning, yes. When Allah's Apostle finished (the prayer), he glorified and
praised Allah and said, "There is not anything that I have not seen before but
I have seen now at this place of mine, even Paradise and Hell. It has been
revealed to me that you people will be put to trial nearly like the trial of AdDajjal, in your graves. As for the true believer or a Muslim (the sub-narrator
is not sure as to which of the two (words Asma' had said) he will say,
'Muhammad came with clear signs from Allah, and we responded to him
(accepted his teachings) and believed (what he said)' It will be said (to him)
'Sleep in peace; we have known that you were a true believer who believed
with certainty.' As for a hypocrite or a doubtful person, (the sub-narrator is
not sure as to which word Asma' said) he will say, 'I do not know, but I heard
the people saying something and so I said the same.' "

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 391:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Leave me as I leave you) for the people who were before
you were ruined because of their questions and their differences over their
prophets. So, if I forbid you to do something, then keep away from it. And if
I order you to do something, then do of it as much as you can."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 392:
Narrated Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas:
The Prophet said, "The most sinful person among the Muslims is the one
who asked about something which had not been prohibited, but was
prohibited because of his asking."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 393:
Narrated Zaid bin Thabit:
The Prophet took a room made of date palm leaves mats in the mosque.
Allah's Apostle prayed in it for a few nights till the people gathered (to pray
the night prayer (Tarawih) (behind him.) Then on the 4th night the people
did not hear his voice and they thought he had slept, so some of them
started humming in order that he might come out. The Prophet then said,
"You continued doing what I saw you doing till I was afraid that this
(Tarawih prayer) might be enjoined on you, and if it were enjoined on you,
you would not continue performing it. Therefore, O people! Perform your
prayers at your homes, for the best prayer of a person is what is performed
at his home except the compulsory congregational) prayer." (See Hadith
No. 229,Vol. 3) (See Hadith No. 134, Vol. 8)

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 394:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari:
Allah's Apostle was asked about things which he disliked, and when the
people asked too many questions, he became angry and said, "Ask me (any
question)." A man got up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Who is my father?"
The Prophet replied, "Your father is Hudhaifa." Then another man got up
and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Who is my father?" The Prophet said, "Your
father is Salim, Maula Shaiba." When 'Umar saw the signs of anger on the
face of Allah's Apostle, he said, "We repent to Allah."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 395:
Narrated Warrad:
(The clerk of Al-Mughira) Muawiya wrote to Al-Mughira 'Write to me what
you have heard from Allah's Apostle.' So he (Al-Mughira) wrote to him:
Allah's Prophet used to say at the end of each prayer: "La ilaha illalla-h
wahdahu la sharika lahu, lahul Mulku, wa lahul Hamdu wa hula ala kulli
shai'in qadir. 'Allahumma la mani' a lima a'taita, wala mu'tiya lima mana'ta,
wala yanfa'u dhuljadd minkal-jadd." He also wrote to him that the Prophet
used to forbid (1) Qil and Qal (idle useless talk or that you talk too much
about others), (2) Asking too many questions (in disputed Religious
matters); (3) And wasting one's wealth by extravagance; (4) and to be
undutiful to one's mother (5) and to bury the daughters alive (6) and to
prevent your favors (benevolence to others (i.e. not to pay the rights of
others (7) And asking others for something (except when it is unavoidable).

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 396:
Narrated Anas:
We were with 'Umar and he said, "We have been forbidden to undertake a
difficult task beyond our capability (i.e. to exceed the religious limits e.g., to
clean the inside of the eyes while doing ablution)."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 397:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Prophet came out after the sun had declined and offered the Zuhr
prayer (in congregation). After finishing it with Taslim, he stood on the
pulpit and mentioned the Hour and mentioned there would happen great
events before it. Then he said, "Whoever wants to ask me any question, may
do so, for by Allah, you will not ask me about anything but I will inform you
of its answer as long as I am at this place of mine." On this, the Ansar wept
violently, and Allah's Apostle kept on saying, "Ask Me! " Then a man got up
and asked, ''Where will my entrance be, O Allah's Apostle?" The Prophet
said, "(You will go to) the Fire." Then 'Abdullah bin Hudhaifa got up and
asked, "Who is my father, O Allah's Apostle?" The Prophet replied, "Your
father is Hudhaifa." The Prophet then kept on saying (angrily), "Ask me! Ask
me!" 'Umar then knelt on his knees and said, "We have accepted Allah as
our Lord and Islam as our religion and Muhammad as an Apostle." Allah's
Apostle became quiet when 'Umar said that. Then Allah's Apostle said, "By
Him in Whose Hand my life is, Paradise and Hell were displayed before me
across this wall while I was praying, and I never saw such good and evil as I
have seen today."
Volume 9, Book 92, Number 398:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
A man said, "O Allah's Prophet! Who is my father?" The Prophet said, "Your
father is so-and-so." And then the Divine Verse:-- 'O you who believe! Ask not
questions about things..(5.101)

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 399:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "People will not stop asking questions till they say, 'This
is Allah, the Creator of everything, then who created Allah?' "

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 400:
Narrated Ibn Masud:
I was with the Prophet at one of the farms of Medina while he was leaning
on a date palm leaf-stalk. He passed by a group of Jews and some of them
said to the other, Ask him (the Prophet) about the spirit. Some others said,
"Do not ask him, lest he should tell you what you dislike" But they went up
to him and said, "O Abal Qasim! Inform us bout the spirit." The Prophet
stood up for a while, waiting. I realized that he was being Divinely Inspired,
so I kept away from him till the inspiration was over. Then the Prophet said,
"(O Muhammad) they ask you regarding the spirit, Say: The spirit its
knowledge is with my Lord (i.e., nobody has its knowledge except Allah)"
(17.85) (This is a miracle of the Qur'an that all the scientists up till now do
not know about the spirit, i.e, how life comes to a body and how it goes
away at its death) (See Hadith No. 245, Vol. 6)

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 401:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet wore a gold ring and then the people followed him and wore
gold rings too. Then the Prophet said, "I had this golden ring made for
myself. He then threw it away and said, "I shall never put it on." Thereupon
the people also threw their rings away.

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 402:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said (to his companions), "Do not fast Al-Wisal." They said, "But
you fast Al-Wisail." He said, "I am not like you, for at night my Lord feeds me
and makes me drink." But the people did not give up Al-Wisal, so the
Prophet fasted Al-Wisal with them for two days or two nights, and then they
saw the crescent whereupon the Prophet said, "If the crescent had delayed,
I would have continued fasting (because of you)," as if he wanted to
vanquish them completely (because they had refused to give up Al Wisal).

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 403:
Narrated Ibrahim At Tamii's father:
Ali addressed us while he was standing on a brick pulpit and carrying a
sword from which was hanging a scroll He said "By Allah, we have no book
to read except Allah's Book and whatever is on this scroll," And then he
unrolled it, and behold, in it was written what sort of camels were to be
given as blood money, and there was also written in it: 'Medina is a
sanctuary form 'Air (mountain) to such and such place so whoever
innovates in it an heresy or commits a sin therein, he will incur the curse of
Allah, the angles, and all the people and Allah will not accept his compulsory
or optional good deeds.' There was also written in it: 'The asylum (pledge of
protection) granted by any Muslims is one and the same, (even a Muslim of
the lowest status is to be secured and respected by all the other Muslims,
and whoever betrays a Muslim in this respect (by violating the pledge) will
incur the curse of Allah, the angels, and all the people, and Allah will not
accept his compulsory or optional good deeds.' There was also written in it:
'Whoever (freed slave) befriends (takes as masters) other than his real
masters (manumitters) without their permission will incur the curse of Allah,
the angels, and all the people, and Allah will not accept his compulsory or
optional good deeds. ' (See Hadith No. 94, Vol. 3)

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 404:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet did something as it was allowed from the religious point of
view but some people refrained from it. When the Prophet heard of that,
he, after glorifying and praising Allah, said, "Why do some people refrain
from doing something which I do? By Allah, I know Allah more than they."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 405:
Narrated Ibn Abi Mulaika:
Once the two righteous men, i.e., Abu Bakr and 'Umar were on the verge of
destruction (and that was because): When the delegate of Bani Tamim came
to the Prophet, one of them (either Abu Bakr or 'Umar) recommended AlAqra' bin Habis At-Tamimi Al-Hanzali, the brother of Bani Majashi (to be
appointed as their chief), while the other recommended somebody else.
Abu Bakr said to 'Umar, "You intended only to oppose me." 'Umar said, "I
did not intend to oppose you!" Then their voices grew louder in front of the
Prophet whereupon there was revealed: 'O you who believe! Do not raise
your voices above the voice of the Prophet..a great reward.' (49.2-3) Ibn AzZubair said, 'Thence forward when 'Umar talked to the Prophet, he would
talk like one who whispered a secret and would even fail to make the
Prophet hear him, in which case the Prophet would ask him (to repeat his
words)."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 406:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(the mother of believers) Allah's Apostle during his fatal ailment said, "Order
Abu Bakr to lead the people in prayer." I said, "If Abu Bakr stood at your
place (in prayers, the people will not be able to hear him because of his
weeping, so order 'Umar to lead the people in prayer." He again said, "Order
Abu Bakr to lead the people in prayer " Then I said to Hafsa, "Will you say (to
the Prophet), 'If Abu Bakr stood at your place, the people will not be able to
hear him be cause of his weeping, so order 'Umar to lead the people in
prayer?" Hafsa did so, whereupon Allah's Apostle said, "You are like the
companions of Joseph (See Qur'an, 12:30-32). Order Abu Bakr to lead the
people in prayer." Hafsa then said to me, "I have never received any good
from you!"

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 407:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd As-Sa'idi:
'Uwaimir Al-'Ajlani came to 'Asim bin 'Adi and said, "If a man found another
man with his wife and killed him, would you sentence the husband to death
(in Qisas,) i.e., equality in punishment)? O 'Asim! Please ask Allah's Apostle
about this matter on my behalf." 'Asim asked the Prophet but the Prophet
disliked the question and disapproved of it. 'Asim returned and informed
'Uwaimir that the Prophet disliked that type of question. 'Uwaimir said, "By
Allah, I will go (personally) to the Prophet." 'Uwaimir came to the Prophet
when Allah had already revealed Qur'anic Verses (in that respect), after
'Asim had left (the Prophet ). So the Prophet said to 'Uwaimir, "Allah has
revealed Qur'anic Verses regarding you and your wife." The Prophet then
called for them, and they came and carried out the order of Lian.
Then 'Uwaimir said, "O Allah's Apostle! Now if I kept her with me, I would be
accused of telling a lie." So 'Uwaimir divorced her although the Prophet did
not order him to do so. Later on this practice of divorcing became the
tradition of couples involved in a case of Li'an. The Prophet said (to the
people). "Wait for her! If she delivers a red short (small) child like a Wahra (a
short red animal). then I will be of the opinion that he ('Uwaimir) has told a
lie but if she delivered a black big-eyed one with big buttocks, then I will be
of the opinion that he has told the truth about her." 'Ultimately she gave
birth to a child that proved the accusation. (See Hadith No. 269, Vol. 6)

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 408:
Narrated Malik bin Aus An-Nasri:
I proceeded till I entered upon 'Umar (and while I was sitting there), his
gate-keeper Yarfa came to him and said, " 'Uthman, 'Abdur-Rahman, AzZubair and Sa'd ask your permission to come in." 'Umar allowed them. So
they entered, greeted, and sat down. (After a while the gatekeeper came)
and said, "Shall I admit 'Ali and 'Abbas?'' 'Umar allowed them to enter. Al'Abbas said "O Chief of the believers! Judge between me and the oppressor
('Ali)." Then there was a dispute (regarding the property of Bani Nadir)
between them ('Abbas and 'Ali). 'Uthman and his companions said, "O Chief
of the Believers! Judge between them and relieve one from the other."
Umar said, "Be patient! beseech you by Allah, with Whose permission the
Heaven and the Earth Exist! Do you know that Allah's Apostle said, 'Our
property is not to be inherited, and whatever we leave is to be given in
charity,' and by this Allah's Apostle meant himself?" On that the group said,
"He verily said so." 'Umar then faced 'Ali and 'Abbas and said, "I beseech
you both by Allah, do you both know that Allah's Apostle said so?" They
both replied, "Yes". 'Umar then said, "Now I am talking to you about this
matter (in detail) . Allah favored Allah's Apostle with some of this wealth
which He did not give to anybody else, as Allah said: 'What Allah bestowed
as Fai (Booty on His Apostle for which you made no expedition... ' (59.6)
So that property was totally meant for Allah's Apostle, yet he did not collect
it and ignore you, nor did he withhold it with your exclusion, but he gave it
to you and distributed it among you till this much of it was left behind, and
the Prophet, used to spend of this as the yearly expenditures of his family
and then take what remained of it and spent it as he did with (other) Allah's
wealth. The Prophet did so during all his lifetime, and I beseech you by Allah,
do you know that?" They replied, "Yes." 'Umar then addressed 'Ali and
'Abbas, saying, "I beseech you both by Allah, do you know that?" Both of
them replied, "Yes." 'Umar added, "Then Allah took His Apostle unto Him.
Abu Bakr then said 'I am the successor of Allah's Apostle' and took over all
the Prophet's property and disposed of it in the same way as Allah's Apostle
used to do, and you were present then." Then he turned to 'Ali and 'Abbas
and said, "You both claim that Abu Bakr did so-and-so in managing the
property, but Allah knows that Abu Bakr was honest, righteous, intelligent,
and a follower of what is right in managing it.
Then Allah took Abu Bakr unto Him, 'I said: I am the successor of Allah's
Apostle and Abu Bakr.' So I took over the property for two years and
managed it in the same way as Allah's Apostle, and Abu Bakr used to do.
Then you both ('Ali and 'Abbas) came to me and asked for the same thing!
(O 'Abbas! You came to me to ask me for your share from nephew's
property; and this ('Ali) came to me asking for his wives share from her
father's property, and I said to you both, 'If you wish, I will place it in your
custody on condition that you both will manage it in the same way as Allah's
Apostle and Abu Bakr did and as I have been doing since I took charge of
managing it; otherwise, do not speak to me anymore about it.'
Then you both said, 'Give it to us on that (condition).' So I gave it to you on
that condition. Now I beseech you by Allah, did I not give it to them on that
condition?" The group (whom he had been addressing) replied, "Yes."
'Umar then addressed 'Abbas and 'Ali saying, "I beseech you both by Allah,
didn't I give you all that property on that condition?" They said, "Yes." 'Umar
then said, "Are you now seeking a verdict from me other than that? By Him
with Whose Permission the Heaven and the Earth exists I will not give any
verdict other than that till the Hour is established; and if you both are unable
to manage this property, then you can hand it back to me, and I will be
sufficient for it on your behalf." (See, Hadith No. 326, Vol. 4)

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 409:
Narrated 'Asim:
I said to Anas, "Did Allah's Apostle make Medina a sanctuary?" He replied,
"Yes, (Medina is a sanctuary from such-and-such place to such-and-such
place. It is forbidden to cut its trees, and whoever innovates an heresy in it
or commits a sin therein, will incur the curse of Allah, the angels, and all the
people." Then Musa bin Anas told me that Anas added, "..... or gives refuge
to such an heretic or a sinner..."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 410:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Allah will not deprive you of knowledge after he
has given it to you, but it will be taken away through the death of the
religious learned men with their knowledge. Then there will remain ignorant
people who, when consulted, will give verdicts according to their opinions
whereby they will mislead others and go astray."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 411:
Narrated Al-A'mash:
I asked Abu Wail, "Did you witness the battle of Siffin between 'Ali and
Muawiya?" He said, "Yes," and added, "Then I heard Sahl bin Hunaif saying,
'O people! Blame your personal opinions in your religion. No doubt, I
remember myself on the day of Abi Jandal; if I had the power to refuse the
order of Allah's Apostle, I would have refused it.
We have never put our swords on our shoulders to get involved in a
situation that might have been horrible for us, but those swords brought us
to victory and peace, except this present situation.' " Abu Wail said, "I
witnessed the battle of Siffin, and how nasty Siffin was!"

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 412:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
I fell ill, Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr came to visit me on foot. The Prophet
came to me while I was unconscious. Allah's Apostle performed ablution
and poured the Remaining water of his ablution over me whereupon I
became conscious and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! How should I spend my
wealth? Or how should I deal with my wealth?" But the Prophet did not give
me any reply till the Verse of the laws of inheritance was revealed.

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 413:
Narrated Abu Said:
A woman came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Men (only)
benefit by your teachings, so please devote to us from (some of) your time,
a day on which we may come to you so that you may teach us of what Allah
has taught you." Allah's Apostle said, "Gather on such-and-such a day at
such-and-such a place." They gathered and Allah's Apostle came to them
and taught them of what Allah had taught him. He then said, "No woman
among you who has lost her three children (died) but that they will screen
her from the Fire." A woman among them said, "O Allah's Apostle! If she lost
two children?" She repeated her question twice, whereupon the Prophet
said, "Even two, even two, even two!" (See Hadith No. 341, Vol. 2)

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 414:
Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba:
The Prophet said, "A group of my follower swill remain predominant
(victorious) till Allah's Order (the Hour) comes upon them while they are still
predominant (victorious)."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 415:
Narrated Humaid:
I heard Muawiya bin Abi Sufyan delivering a sermon. He said, "I heard the
Prophet saying, "If Allah wants to do a favor to somebody, He bestows on
him, the gift of understanding the Quran and Sunna. I am but a distributor,
and Allah is the Giver. The state of this nation will remain good till the Hour
is established, or till Allah's Order comes."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 416:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
When the (following) Verse was revealed to Allah's Apostle: 'Say: He has
power to send torment on you from above,'..(6.65) he said, "O Allah! I seek
refuge with Your Face (from that punishment)." And when this was
revealed: '..or from beneath your feet.' (6.65) he said, "O Allah! I seek refuge
with Your Face (from that)." And when this Verse was revealed: '..or to
cover you with confusion in party-strife, and make you to taste the violence
of one another,'...(6.65) he said: "These two warnings are easier (than the
previous ones)."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 417:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
A bedouin came to Allah's Apostle and said, "My wife has delivered a black
boy, and I suspect that he is not my child." Allah's Apostle said to him, "Have
you got camels?" The bedouin said, "Yes." The Prophet said, "What color are
they?" The bedouin said, "They are red." The Prophet said, "Are any of them
Grey?" He said, "There are Grey ones among them." The Prophet said,
"Whence do you think this color came to them?" The bedouin said, "O
Allah's Apostle! It resulted from hereditary disposition." The Prophet said,
"And this (i.e., your child) has inherited his color from his ancestors." The
Prophet did not allow him to deny his paternity of the child.

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 418:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
A woman came to the Prophet and said, "My mother vowed to perform the
Hajj but she died before performing it. Should I perform the Hajj on her
behalf?" He said, "Yes! Perform the Hajj on her behalf. See, if your mother
had been in debt, would you have paid her debt?" She said, "Yes." He said,
"So you should pay what is for Him as Allah has more right that one should
fulfill one's obligations to Him. "

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 419:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "Do not wish to be like anybody except in two cases:
The case of a man whom Allah has given wealth and he spends it in the right
way, and that of a man whom Allah has given religious wisdom (i.e., Qur'an
and Sunna) and he gives his verdicts according to it and teaches it." (to
others i.e., religious knowledge of Qur'an and Sunna (Prophet's Traditions)).
"

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 420:
Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba:
'Umar bin Al-Khattab asked (the people) about the Imlas of a woman, i.e., a
woman who has an abortion because of having been beaten on her
abdomen, saying, "Who among you has heard anything about it from the
Prophet?" I said, "I did.'' He said, "What is that?" I said, "I heard the Prophet
saying, "Its Diya (blood money) is either a male or a female slave.' " 'Umar
said, "Do not leave till you present witness in support of your statement." So
I went out, and found Muhammad bin Maslama. I brought him, and he bore
witness with me that he had heard the Prophet saying, "Its Diya (blood
money) is either a male slave or a female slave."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 421:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The Hour will not be established till my followers copy
the deeds of the previous nations and follow them very closely, span by
span, and cubit by cubit (i.e., inch by inch)." It was said, "O Allah's Apostle!
Do you mean by those (nations) the Persians and the Byzantines?" The
Prophet said, "Who can it be other than they?"

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 422:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said, "You will follow the ways of those nations who were
before you, span by span and cubit by cubit (i.e., inch by inch) so much so
that even if they entered a hole of a mastigure, you would follow them." We
said, "O Allah's Apostle! (Do you mean) the Jews and the Christians?" He
said, "Whom else?"

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 423:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "None is killed unjustly, but the first son of Adam will have
a part of its burden." Sufyan said, "..a part of its blood because he was the
first to establish the tradition of murdering"

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 424t:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah As-Salami:
A bedouin gave the Pledge of allegiance for embracing Islam to Allah's
Apostle, and then he got an attack of fever in Medina and came to Allah's
Apostle: and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Cancel my pledge." Allah's Apostle
refused to do so. The bedouin came to him again and said, "Cancel my
pledge," but he refused again, and then again, the bedouin came to him and
said, "Cancel my pledge," and Allah's Apostle refused. The bedouin finally
went away, and Allah's Apostle said, "Medina is like a pair of bellows
(furnace), it expels its impurities while it brightens and clears its good.'
9.424.:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
I used to teach Qur'an to 'Abdur-Rahman bin Auf. When Umar performed his
last Hajj, 'Abdur-Rahman said (to me) at Mina, "Would that you had seen
Chief of the believers today! A man came to him and said, "So-and-so has
said, "If Chief of the Believers died, we will give the oath of allegiance to
such-and-such person,' 'Umar said, 'I will get up tonight and warn those who
want to usurp the people's rights.' I said, 'Do not do so, for the season (of
Hajj) gathers the riffraff mob who will form the majority of your audience,
and I am afraid that they will not understand (the meaning of) your saying
properly and may spread (an incorrect statement) everywhere. You should
wait till we reach Medina, the place of migration and the place of the Sunna
(the Prophet's Traditions). There you will meet the companions of Allah's
Apostle from the Muhajirin and the Ansar who will understand your
statement and place it in its proper position' 'Umar said, 'By Allah, I shall do
so the first time I stand (to address the people) in Medina.' When we
reached Medina, 'Umar (in a Friday Khutba-sermon) said, "No doubt, Allah
sent Muhammad with the Truth and revealed to him the Book (Quran), and
among what was revealed, was the Verse of Ar-Rajm (stoning adulterers to
death).'" (See Hadith No. 817,Vol. 8)

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 425:
Narrated Muhammad:
We were with Abu Huraira while he was wearing two linen garments dyed
with red clay. He cleaned his nose with his garment, saying, "Bravo! Bravo!
Abu Huraira is cleaning his nose with linen! There came a time when I would
fall senseless between the pulpit of Allah's Apostle and 'Aisha's dwelling
whereupon a passerby would come and put his foot on my neck,
considering me a mad man, but in fact, I had no madness, I suffered nothing
but hunger."
Volume 9, Book 92, Number 426:
Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Abis:
Ibn 'Abbas was asked, "Did you offer the Id prayer with the Prophet?" He
said, "Yes, had it not been for my close relation to the Prophet, I would not
have performed it (with him) because of my being too young The Prophet
came to the mark which is near the home of Kathir bin As-Salt and offered
the Id prayer and then delivered the sermon. I do not remember if any
Adhan or Iqama were pronounced for the prayer. Then the Prophet ordered
(the women) to give alms, and they started stretching out their hands
towards their ears and throats (giving their ornaments in charity), and the
Prophet ordered Bilal to go to them (to collect the alms), and then Bilal
returned to the Prophet

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 427:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet used to go to the Quba' mosque, sometimes walking,
sometimes riding.

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 428:
Narrated Hisham's father:
'Aisha said to 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair, "Bury me with my female companions
(i.e. the wives of the Prophet) and do not bury me with the Prophet in the
house, for I do not like to be regarded as sanctified (just for being buried
there).''
Narrated Hisham's father: 'Umar sent a message to 'Aisha, saying, "Will you
allow me to be buried with my two companions (the Prophet and Abu Bakr)
?" She said, "Yes, by Allah." though it was her habit that if a man from
among the companions (of the Prophet ) sent her a message asking her to
allow him to be buried there, she would say, "No, by Allah, I will never give
permission to anyone to be buried with them."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 429:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle used to perform the 'Asr prayer and then one could reach
the 'Awali (a place in the outskirts of Medina) while the sun was still quite
high.
Narrated Yunus: The distance of the 'Awali (from Medina) was four or three
miles.

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 430:
Narrated As-Sa'ib bin Yazid:
The Sa' (a kind of measure) during the lifetime of the Prophet used to be
equal to the one Mudd (another kind of measure) and one third of a Mudd
which we use today, but the Sa' of today has become large.

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 431:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "O Allah! Bestow Your Blessings on their measures, and
bestow Your Blessings on their Sa' and Mudd." He meant those of the
people of Medina.

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 432:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Jews brought a man and a woman who had committed illegal sexual
intercourse, to the Prophet and the Prophet ordered them to be stoned to
death, and they were stoned to death near the mosque where the biers
used to be placed.

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 433:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Mountain of Uhud came in sight of Allah's Apostle who then said, "This
is a mountain that loves us and is loved by us. O Allah! Abraham made Mecca
a sanctuary and I make the area between its (Medina's) two mountains a
sanctuary."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 434:
Narrated Sahl:
The distance between the pulpit and the wall of the mosque on the side of
the Qibla was just sufficient for a sheep to pass through.

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 435:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Between my house and my pulpit there is a garden
from one of the gardens of Paradise, and my pulpit is over my Lake-Tank.
(Kauthar);

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 436:
Narrated Nafi:
'Abdullah said, "The Prophet arranged for a horse race, and the prepared
horses were given less food for a few days before the race to win the race,
and were allowed to run from Al-Hafya to Thaniyat-al-Wada', and the
unprepared horses were allowed to run between Thaniyat-al-Wada' and the
mosque of Bani Zuraiq," 'Abdullah was one of those who participated in the
race.

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 437:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
I heard 'Umar (delivering a sermon) on the pulpit of the Prophet.

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 438:
Narrated As-Sa'ib bin Yazid:
That he heard 'Uthman bin 'Affan delivering a sermon on the pulpit of the
Prophet

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 439:
Narrated 'Aisha:
This big copper vessel used to be put for me and Allah's Apostle and we
would take water from it together (on taking a bath) .

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 440:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet brought the Ansar and the Quarish people into alliance in my
house at Medina, and he invoked Allah for one month against the tribe of
Bani Sulaim in (the last Rak'a of each compulsory) prayer.

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 441:
Narrated Abu Burda:
When I arrived at Medina, 'Abdullah bin Salam met me and said to me,
"Accompany me to my house so that I may make you drink from a bowl
from which Allah's Apostle used to drink, and that you may offer prayer in
the mosque in which the Prophet used to pray." I accompanied him, and he
made me drink Sawiq and gave me dates to eat, and then I prayed in his
mosque.

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 442:
Narrated 'Umar:
The Prophet said to me, "Someone came to me tonight from my Lord while I
was in the 'Aqiq (valley), and said to me, "Offer prayer in this blessed valley
and say: 'Labbaik' for the (performance of) 'Umra and Hajj."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 443:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Dinar:
Ibn 'Umar said, "The Prophet fixed Qarn as the Miqat (for assuming the
Ihram) for the people of Najd, and Al-Juhfa for the people of Sham, and
Dhul-Hulaifa for the people of Medina." Ibn 'Umar added, "I heard this from
the Prophet, and I have been informed that the Prophet said, 'The Miqat for
the Yemenites is Yalamlam.' "When Iraq was mentioned, he said, "At that
time it was not a Muslim country."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 444:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
The Prophet had a dream in the last portion of the night when he was
sleeping at Dhul-Hulaifa. (I n the dream) it was said to him, "You are in a
blessed Batha' (i.e., valley)."
Volume 9, Book 92, Number 445:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
That he heard the Prophet, after raising his head from the bowing in
morning prayer, saying, "O Allah, our Lord! All the praises are for you." And
in the last (Rak'a) he said, "O Allah! Curse so-and-so and so--and-so." And
then Allah revealed:-- 'Not for you (O Muhammad) is the decision, (but for
Allah), whether He turns in mercy to them or punish them, for they are
indeed wrongdoers.' (3.128)

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 446:
Narrated 'Ali bin Abi Talib:
That Allah's Apostle came to him and Fatima the daughter of Allah's Apostle
at their house at night and said, "Won't you pray?" 'Ali replied, "O Allah's
Apostle! Our souls are in the Hands of Allah and when he wants us to get up,
He makes us get up." When 'Ali said that to him, Allah's Apostle left without
saying anything to him. While the Prophet was leaving, 'Ali heard him
striking his thigh (with his hand) and saying, "But man is quarrelsome more
than anything else." (18.54)

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 447:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
While we were in the mosque, Allah's Apostle came out and said, "Let us
proceed to the Jews." So we went out with him till we came to Bait-alMidras. The Prophet stood up there and called them, saying, "O assembly of
Jews! Surrender to Allah (embrace Islam) and you will be safe!" They said,
"You have conveyed Allah's message, O Aba-al-Qasim" Allah's Apostle then
said to them, "That is what I want; embrace Islam and you will be safe."
They said, "You have conveyed the message, O Aba-al-Qasim." Allah's
Apostle then said to them, "That is what I want," and repeated his words for
the third time and added, "Know that the earth is for Allah and I want to
exile you from this land, so whoever among you has property he should sell
it, otherwise, know that the land is for Allah and His Apostle."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 448:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
Allah's Apostle said, "Noah will be brought (before Allah) on the Day of
Resurrection, and will be asked, 'Did you convey the message of Allah?" He
will reply, 'Yes, O Lord.' And then Noah's nation will be asked, 'Did he (Noah)
convey Allah's message to you?' They will reply, 'No warner came to us.'
Then Noah will be asked, 'Who are your witnesses?' He will reply. '(My
witnesses are) Muhammad and his followers.' Thereupon you (Muslims) will
be brought and you will bear witness." Then the Prophet recited: 'And thus
We have made of you (Muslims) a just and the best nation, that you might
be witness over the nations, and the Apostle a witness over you.' (2.143)

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 449:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri and Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle sent the brother of the tribe of Bani Adi Al-Ansari as
governor of Khaibar. Then the man returned, bringing Janib (a good kind of
date). Allah's Apostle asked him, "Are all the dates of Khaibar like that?" He
replied, "No, by Allah, O Allah's Apostle! We take one Sa' of these (good)
dates for two Sas of mixed dates." Allah's Apostle then said, "Do not do so.
You should either take one Sa of this (kind) for one Sa' of the other; or sell
one kind and then buy with its price the other kind (of dates), and you
should do the same in weighing."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 450:
Narrated 'Amr bin Al-'As:
That he heard Allah's Apostle saying, "If a judge gives a verdict according to
the best of his knowledge and his verdict is correct (i.e. agrees with Allah
and His Apostle's verdict) he will receive a double reward, and if he gives a
verdict according to the best of his knowledge and his verdict is wrong, (i.e.
against that of Allah and His Apostle) even then he will get a reward ."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 451:
Narrated 'Ubai bin 'Umar:
Abu Musa asked permission to enter upon 'Umar, but seeing that he was
busy, he went away. 'Umar then said, "Didn't I hear the voice of 'Abdullah
bin Qais? Allow him to come in." He was called in and 'Umar said to him,
"What made you do what you did." He replied, "We have been instructed
thus by the Prophet" 'Umar said, "Bring proof (witness) for this, other wise I
will do so-and-so to you." Then 'Abdullah bin Qais went to a gathering of the
Ansar who then said, "None but the youngest of us will give the witness for
it." So Abu Said Al-Khudri got up and said, "We used to be instructed thus
(by the Prophet)." 'Umar said, "This tradition of the Prophet remained
hidden from me. Business in the market kept me busy."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 452:
Narrated Al-A'raj:
Abu Huraira said, "You people claim that Abu Huraira narrates many
narrations of Allah's Apostle. (Anyhow) with Allah will be our appointment. I
was a poor man, and used to stick to Allah's Apostle contented with what
will fill my stomach, and the Muhajirin (emigrants) used to be busy trading in
the markets, and the Ansar used to be busy looking after their properties.
One-day I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'Who will spread his Rida' (a garment
covering the upper part of the body) till I finished my speech and then fold
it, (i.e. wrap it over your body), in which case he will never forget anything
he had heard from me." So I spread my garment which I was wearing; and
by Him Who sent Muhammad with the Truth, ever since, I have never
forgotten whatever I heard from him (the Prophet)" (See, Hadith No. 119,
Vol. 1)

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 453:
Narrated Muhammad bin Al-Munkadir:
I saw Jabir bin 'Abdullah swearing by Allah that Ibn Sayyad was the Dajjal. I
said to Jabir, "How can you swear by Allah?" Jabir said, "I have heard 'Umar
swearing by Allah regarding this matter in the presence of the Prophet and
the Prophet did not disapprove of it."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 454:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Horses may be used for three purposes: For a man
they may be a source of reward (in the Hereafter); for another, a means of
protection; and for another, a source of sin. The man for whom they are a
source of reward, is the one who keeps them for Allah's Cause and ties them
with long ropes and lets them graze in a pasture or garden. Whatever those
long ropes allow them to eat of that pasture or garden, will be written as
good deeds for him and if they break their ropes and run one or two rounds,
then all their footsteps and dung will be written as good deeds for him, and
if they pass a river and drink from it though he has had no intention of
watering them, even then, that will be written as good deeds for him. So
such horses are a source of reward for that man. For the man who keeps
horses for his livelihood in order not to ask others for help or beg his bread,
and at the same time he does not forget Allah's right of what he earns
through them and of their backs (that he presents it to be used in Allah's
Cause), such horses are a shelter for him (from poverty). For the man who
keeps them just out of pride and for showing off, they are a source of sin."
Then Allah's Apostle was asked about donkeys. He said, "Allah has not
revealed anything to me regarding them except this comprehensive Verse:
"Then anyone who has done good, equal to the weight of an atom (or a
small ant) shall see it, and any one who has done evil, equal to the weight of
an atom (or a small ant) shall see it." (99.7-8)

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 455:
Narrated 'Aisha:
A woman asked the Prophet (Hadith 456).

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 456:
Narrated 'Aisha:
A woman asked the Prophet about the periods: How to take a bath after the
periods. He said, "Take a perfumed piece of cloth and clean yourself with it."
She said,' "How shall I clean myself with it, O Allah's Apostle?" The Prophet
said, "Clean yourself" She said again, "How shall I clean myself, O Allah's
Apostle?" The Prophet said, "Clean yourself with it." Then I knew what
Allah's Apostle meant. So I pulled her aside and explained it to her.

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 457:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Um Hufaid bint Al-Harith bin Hazn presented the Prophet with some butter,
dried yoghurt (curd milk) and mastigures as a gift. The Prophet then asked
for a meal (mastigures etc. to be put) and it was eaten over his table cloth,
but the Prophet did not eat of it, as he had aversion to it. But if it had been
illegal to eat, it would not have been eaten over his table cloth nor would he
have ordered that (mastigures meat) to be eaten

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 458:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah
The Prophet said, "Whoever has eaten garlic or onion, should keep away
from us, or should keep away from our mosque and should stay at home."
Ibn Wahb said, "Once a plate full of cooked vegetables was brought to the
Prophet at Badr. Detecting a bad smell from it, he asked about the dish and
was informed of the kinds of vegetables in contained. He then said, "Bring it
near," and so it was brought near to one of his companions who was with
him. When the Prophet saw it, he disliked eating it and said (to his
companion), "Eat, for I talk in secret to ones whom you do not talk to."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 459:
Narrated Jubair bin Mutim:
A lady came to Allah's Apostle and she talked to him about something, and
he gave her some order. She said, "O Allah's Apostle! If I should not find
you?" He said, "If you should not find me, then go to Abu Bakr." Ibrahim bin
Sa'd said, "As if she meant the death (of the Prophet)."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 460:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The people of the Book used to read the Torah in Hebrew and then explain
it in Arabic to the Muslims. Allah's Apostle said (to the Muslims). "Do not
believe the people of the Book, nor disbelieve them, but say, 'We believe in
Allah and whatever is revealed to us, and whatever is revealed to you.' "

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 461:
Narrated Ubaidullah:
Ibn 'Abbas said, "Why do you ask the people of the scripture about anything
while your Book (Quran) which has been revealed to Allah's Apostle is
newer and the latest? You read it pure, undistorted and unchanged, and
Allah has told you that the people of the scripture (Jews and Christians)
changed their scripture and distorted it, and wrote the scripture with their
own hands and said, 'It is from Allah,' to sell it for a little gain. Does not the
knowledge which has come to you prevent you from asking them about
anything? No, by Allah, we have never seen any man from them asking you
regarding what has been revealed to you!"

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 462:
Narrated 'Aisha:
After the slanderers had given a forged statement against her, Allah's
Apostle called 'Ali bin Abi Talib and Usama bin Zaid when the Divine
Inspiration was delayed. He wanted to ask them and consult them about the
question of divorcing me. Usama gave his evidence that was based on what
he knew about my innocence, but 'Ali said, "Allah has not put restrictions on
you and there are many women other than her. Furthermore you may ask
the slave girl who will tell you the truth." So the Prophet asked Barira (my
salve girl), "Have you seen anything that may arouse your suspicion?" She
replied, "I have not seen anything more than that she is a little girl who
sleeps, leaving the dough of her family (unguarded) that the domestic goats
come and eat it." Then the Prophet stood on the pulpit and said, "O
Muslims! Who will help me against the man who has harmed me by
slandering my wife? By Allah, I know nothing about my family except good."
The narrator added: Then the Prophet mentioned the innocence of 'Aisha.
(See Hadith No. 274, Vol. 6)

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 463:
Narrated Aisha:
Allah's Apostle addressed the people, and after praising and glorifying Allah,
he said, "What do you suggest me regarding those people who are abusing
my wife? I have never known anything bad about her." The sub-narrator,
'Urwa, said: When 'Aisha was told of the slander, she said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Will you allow me to go to my parents' home?" He allowed her and
sent a slave along with her. An Ansari man said, "Subhanaka! It is not right
for us to speak about this. Subhanaka! This is a great lie!"

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 464:
Narrated Ata:
I heard Jabir bin 'Abdullah in a gathering saying, "We, the companions of
Allah's Apostle assumed the state of Ihram to perform only Hajj without
'Umra." Jabir added, "The Prophet arrived (at Mecca) on the fourth of DhulHijja. And when we arrived (in Mecca) the Prophet ordered us to finish the
state of Ihram, saying, "Finish your lhram and go to your wives (for sexual
relation)." Jabir added, "The Prophet did not oblige us (to go to our wives)
but he only made that legal for us. Then he heard that we were saying,
"When there remains only five days between us and the Day of Arafat he
orders us to finish our Ihram by sleeping with our wives in which case we will
proceed to 'Arafat with our male organs dribbling with semen?' (Jabir
pointed out with his hand illustrating what he was saying). Allah's Apostle
stood up and said, 'You (People) know that I am the most Allah-fearing, the
most truthful and the best doer of good deeds (pious) from among you. If I
had not brought the Hadi with me, I would have finished my Ihram as you
will do, so finish your Ihram. If I had formerly known what I came to know
lately, I would not have brought the Hadi with me.' So we finished our Ihram
and listened to the Prophet and obeyed him." (See Hadith No. 713, Vol. 2)

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 465:
Narrated 'Abdullah Al Muzam:
The Prophet said, "Perform (an optional) prayer before Maghrib prayer."
(He repeated it thrice) and the third time he said, "Whoever wants to offer it
can do so," lest the people should take it as a Sunna (tradition). (See Hadith
No. 277, Vol. 2)
Volume 9, Book 92, Number 466:
Narrated Jundab bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "Recite (and study) the Quran as long as you are in
agreement as to its interpretation and meanings, but when you have
differences regarding its interpretation and meanings, then you should stop
reciting it (for the time being.) (See Hadith No 581, Vol. 6)

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 467:
Narrated Jundab bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "Recite (and study) the Qur'an as long as your hearts
are in agreement as to its meanings, but if you have differences as regards
its meaning, stop reading it then."

Volume 9, Book 92, Number 468:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
When the time of the death of the Prophet approached while there were
some men in the house, and among them was 'Umar bin Al-Khatttab, the
Prophet said, "Come near let me write for you a writing after which you will
never go astray." 'Umar said, "The Prophet is seriously ill, and you have the
Quran, so Allah's Book is sufficient for us." The people in the house differed
and disputed. Some of them said, "Come near so that Allah's Apostle may
write for you a writing after which you will not go astray," while some of
them said what 'Umar said. When they made much noise and differed
greatly before the Prophet, he said to them, "Go away and leave me." Ibn
'Abbas used to say, "It was a great disaster that their difference and noise
prevented Allah's Apostle from writing that writing for them.
BOOK 93. ONENESS, UNIQUENESS OF ALLAH (TAWHEED) (469-652)
Volume 9, Book 93, Number 469:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
When the Prophet sent Muadh to Yemen, he said to him, "You are going to a
nation from the people of the Scripture, so let the first thing to which you
will invite them, be the Tauhid of Allah. If they learn that, tell them that Allah
has enjoined on them, five prayers to be offered in one day and one night.
And if they pray, tell them that Allah has enjoined on them Zakat of their
properties and it is to be taken from the rich among them and given to the
poor. And if they agree to that, then take from them Zakat but avoid the
best property of the people."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 470:
Narrated Mu'adh bin Jabal:
The Prophet said, "O Mu'adh! Do you know what Allah's Right upon His
slaves is?" I said, "Allah and His Apostle know best." The Prophet said, "To
worship Him (Allah) Alone and to join none in worship with Him (Allah). Do
you know what their right upon Him is?" I replied, "Allah and His Apostle
know best." The Prophet said, "Not to punish them (if they do so)."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 471:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
A man heard another man reciting (in the prayers): 'Say (O Muhammad):
"He is Allah, the One." (112.1) And he recited it repeatedly. When it was
morning, he went to the Prophet and informed him about that as if he
considered that the recitation of that Sura by itself was not enough. Allah's
Apostle said, "By Him in Whose Hand my life is, it is equal to one-third of the
Quran."
Volume 9, Book 93, Number 472:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet sent (an army unit) under the command of a man who used to
lead his companions in the prayers and would finish his recitation with (the
Sura 112): 'Say (O Muhammad): "He is Allah, the One." ' (112.1) When they
returned (from the battle), they mentioned that to the Prophet. He said (to
them), "Ask him why he does so." They asked him and he said, "I do so
because it mentions the qualities of the Beneficent and I love to recite it (in
my prayer)." The Prophet; said (to them), "Tell him that Allah loves him"

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 473:
Narrated Jarir bin 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah will not be merciful to those who are not merciful
to mankind."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 474:
Narrated Usama bin Zaid:
We were with the Prophet when suddenly there came to him a messenger
from one of his daughters who was asking him to come and see her son who
was dying. The Prophet said (to the messenger), "Go back and tell her that
whatever Allah takes is His, and whatever He gives is His, and everything
with Him has a limited fixed term (in this world). So order her to be patient
and hope for Allah's reward." But she sent the messenger to the Prophet
again, swearing that he should come to her. So the Prophets got up, and so
did Sa'd bin 'Ubada and Mu'adh bin Jabal (and went to her). When the child
was brought to the Prophet his breath was disturbed in his chest as if it
were in a water skin. On that the eyes of the Prophet . became flooded with
tears, whereupon Sa'd said to him, "O Allah's Apostle! What is this?" The
Prophet said, "This is mercy which Allah has put in the heart of His slaves,
and Allah bestows His mercy only on those of His slaves who are merciful (to
others)." (See Hadith No. 373, Vol. 2)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 475:
Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari:
The Prophet said, "None is more patient than Allah against the harmful and
annoying words He hears (from the people): They ascribe children to Him,
yet He bestows upon them health and provision .

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 476:
Narrated Ibn Umar:
The Prophet said, "The keys of the unseen are five and none knows them
but Allah: (1) None knows what is in the womb, but Allah: (2) None knows
what will happen tomorrow, but Allah; (3) None knows when it will rain, but
Allah; (4) None knows where he will die, but Allah (knows that); (5) and
none knows when the Hour will be established, but Allah."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 477:
Narrated Masruq:
'Aisha said, "If anyone tells you that Muhammad has seen his Lord, he is a
liar, for Allah says: 'No vision can grasp Him.' (6.103) And if anyone tells you
that Muhammad has seen the Unseen, he is a liar, for Allah says: "None has
the knowledge of the Unseen but Allah."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 478:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
We used to pray behind the Prophet and used to say: "As-Salamu 'Al-Allah.
The Prophet said, "Allah himself is As-Salam (Name of Allah), so you should
say: 'At-Tahiyatu lil-laihi was- sala-watu wat-taiyibatu, as-sallamu 'Alayka
aiyuha-n-nabiyyu wa rahrmatu-l-lahi wa barak-atuhu, As-salamu 'alaina wa
'ala 'ibaldi-l-lahi as-salihin. Ashhadu an la ilaha il-lallah, wa ash-hadu anna
Muhammadan 'abduhu wa rasuluhu."'

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 479:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "On the Day of Resurrection Allah will hold the whole
earth and fold the heaven with His right hand and say, 'I am the King: where
are the kings of the earth?" '

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 480:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet used to say, "I seek refuge (with YOU) by Your 'Izzat, None has
the right to be worshipped but You Who does not die while the Jinns and
the human beings die."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 481:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "(The people will be thrown into Hell ( Fire) and it will
keep on saying, 'Is there any more?' till the Lord of the worlds puts His Foot
over it, whereupon its different sides will come close to each other, and it
will say, 'Qad! Qad! (enough! enough!) By Your 'Izzat (Honor and Power) and
YOUR KARAM (Generosity)!' Paradise will remain spacious enough to
accommodate more people until Allah will create some more people and let
them dwell in the superfluous space of Paradise. "
Volume 9, Book 93, Number 482:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet used to invoke Allah at night, saying, "O Allah: All the Praises
are for You: You are the Lord of the Heavens and the Earth. All the Praises
are for You; You are the Maintainer of the Heaven and the Earth and
whatever is in them. All the Praises are for You; You are the Light of the
Heavens and the Earth. Your Word is the Truth, and Your Promise is the
Truth, and the Meeting with You is the Truth, and Paradise is the Truth, and
the (Hell) Fire is the Truth, and the Hour is the Truth. O Allah! I surrender
myself to You, and I believe in You and I depend upon You, and I repent to
You and with You (Your evidences) I stand against my opponents, and to
you I leave the judgment (for those who refuse my message). O Allah!
Forgive me my sins that I did in the past or will do in the future, and also the
sins I did in secret or in public. You are my only God (Whom I worship) and
there is no other God for me (i.e. I worship none but You)."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 483:
Narrated Sufyan:
(regarding the above narration) that the Prophet added, "You are the Truth,
and Your Word is the Truth."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 484:
Narrated Abu Musa:
We were with the Prophet on a journey, and whenever we ascended a high
place, we used to say, "Allahu Akbar." The Prophet said, "Don't trouble
yourselves too much! You are not calling a deaf or an absent person, but you
are calling One Who Hears, Sees, and is very near." Then he came to me
while I was saying in my heart, "La hawla wala quwwatta illa billah (There is
neither might nor power but with Allah)." He said, to me, "O 'Abdullah bin
Qais! Say, 'La hawla wala quwwata illa billah (There is neither might nor
power but with Allah), for it is one of the treasures of Paradise." Or said,
"Shall I tell you of it?"

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 485:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:
Abu Bakr As-Siddiq said to the Prophet "O Allah's Apostle! Teach me an
invocation with which I may invoke Allah in my prayers." The Prophet said,
"Say: O Allah! I have wronged my soul very much (oppressed myself), and
none forgives the sins but You; so please bestow Your Forgiveness upon me.
No doubt, You are the Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 486:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet said, "Gabriel called me and said, 'Allah has heard the
statement of your people and what they replied to you.'"

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 487:
Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:
As-Salami: Allah's Apostle used to teach his companions to perform the
prayer of Istikhara for each and every matter just as he used to teach them
the Suras from the Quran He used to say, "If anyone of you intends to do
some thing, he should offer a two rakat prayer other than the compulsory
prayers, and after finishing it, he should say: O Allah! I consult You, for You
have all knowledge, and appeal to You to support me with Your Power and
ask for Your Bounty, for You are able to do things while I am not, and You
know while I do not; and You are the Knower of the Unseen. O Allah If You
know It this matter (name your matter) is good for me both at present and
in the future, (or in my religion), in my this life and in the Hereafter, then
fulfill it for me and make it easy for me, and then bestow Your Blessings on
me in that matter. O Allah! If You know that this matter is not good for me in
my religion, in my this life and in my coming Hereafter (or at present or in
the future), then divert me from it and choose for me what is good
wherever it may be, and make me be pleased with it." (See Hadith No. 391,
Vol. 8)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 488:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet frequently used to swear, "No, by the One Who turns the
hearts."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 489:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah has ninety-nine Names, one-hundred less one;
and he who memorized them all by heart will enter Paradise." To count
something means to know it by heart.

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 490:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "When anyone of you goes to bed, he should dust it off
thrice with the edge of his garment, and say: Bismika Rabbi wada'tu janbi,
wa bika arfa'hu. In amsakta nafsi faghfir laha, wa in arsaltaha fahfazha bima
tahfaz bihi 'ibadaka-s-salihin."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 491:
Narrated Juhaifa:
When the Prophet went to bed, he used to say, "Allhumma bismika ahya wa
amut." And when he got Up in the mornings he used to say, "Alhamdu lillahi
al-ladhi ahyana ba'da ma amatana wa ilaihi-n-nushur."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 492:
Narrated Abu Dharr:
When the Prophet went to bed at night, he used to say: "Bismika namutu wa
nahya." And when he got up in the morning, he used to say, "Alhamdu lillahi
al-ladhi ahyana ba'da ma amatana, wa ilaihi-n-nushur."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 493:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle said, "If anyone of you, when intending to have a sexual
relation (sleep) with his wife, says: Bismillah, Allahumma jannibna
ashShaitan, wa Jannib ash-Shaitana ma razaqtana, Satan would never harm
that child, should it be ordained that they will have one. (Because of that
sleep)."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 494:
Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim:
I asked the Prophet, "I send off (for a game) my trained hunting dogs; (what
is your verdict concerning the game they hunt?" He said, "If you send off
your trained hunting dogs and mention the Name of Allah, then, if they
catch some game, eat (thereof). And if you hit the game with a mi'rad (a
hunting tool) and it wounds it, you can eat (it)."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 495:
Narrated 'Aisha
The people said to the Prophet , "O Allah's Apostle! Here are people who
have recently embraced Islam and they bring meat, and we do not know
whether they had mentioned Allah's Name while slaughtering the animals or
not." The Prophet said, "You should mention Allah's Name and eat."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 496:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet slaughtered two rams as sacrifice and mentioned Allah's Name
and said, "Allahu-Akbar" while slaughtering).

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 497:
Narrated Jundab:
That he witnessed the Prophet on the Day of Nahr. The Prophet offered
prayer and then delivered a sermon saying, "Whoever slaughtered his
sacrifice before offering prayer, should slaughter another animal in place of
the first; and whoever has not yet slaughtered any, should slaughter a
sacrifice and mention Allah's Name while doing so."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 498:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "Do not swear by your fathers; and whoever wants to
swear should swear by Allah."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 499:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle sent ten persons to bring the enemy's secrets and Khubaib
Al-Ansari was one of them. 'Ubaidullah bin 'Iyad told me that the daughter
of Al-Harith told him that when they gathered (to kill Khubaib Al Ansari) he
asked for a razor to clean his pubic region, and when they had taken him
outside the sanctuary of Mecca in order to kill him, he said in verse, "I don't
care if I am killed as a Muslim, on any side (of my body) I may be killed in
Allah's Cause; for that is for the sake of Allah's very Self; and if He will, He
will bestow His Blessings upon the torn pieces of my body." Then Ibn AlHarith killed him, and the Prophet informed his companions of the death of
those (ten men) on the very day they were killed.

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 500:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "There is none having a greater sense of Ghira than Allah,
and for that reason He has forbidden shameful deeds and sins (illegal sexual
intercourse etc.) And there is none who likes to be praised more than Allah
does." (See Hadith No. 147, Vol. 7)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 501:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "When Allah created the Creation, He wrote in His Book-and He wrote (that) about Himself, and it is placed with Him on the Throne-'Verily My Mercy overcomes My Anger.'"

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 502:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah says: 'I am just as My slave thinks I am, (i.e. I am
able to do for him what he thinks I can do for him) and I am with him if He
remembers Me. If he remembers Me in himself, I too, remember him in
Myself; and if he remembers Me in a group of people, I remember him in a
group that is better than they; and if he comes one span nearer to Me, I go
one cubit nearer to him; and if he comes one cubit nearer to Me, I go a
distance of two outstretched arms nearer to him; and if he comes to Me
walking, I go to him running.' "

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 503:
Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:
when this Verse:--'Say (O Muhammad!): He has Power to send torments on
you from above,' (6.65) was revealed; The Prophet said, "I take refuge with
Your Face." Allah revealed:-- '..or from underneath your feet.' (6.65) The
Prophet then said, "I seek refuge with Your Face!" Then Allah revealed:--'...or
confuse you in party-strife.' (6.65) Oh that, the Prophet said, "This is easier."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 504:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
Ad-Dajjal was mentioned in the presence of the Prophet. The Prophet said,
"Allah is not hidden from you; He is not one-eyed," and pointed with his
hand towards his eye, adding, "While Al-Masih Ad-Dajjal is blind in the right
eye and his eye looks like a protruding grape."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 505:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "Allah did not send any prophet but that he warned his
nation of the one-eyed liar (Ad-Dajjal). He is one-eyed while your Lord is not
one-eyed, The word 'Kafir' (unbeliever) is written between his two eyes."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 506:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
That during the battle with Bani Al-Mustaliq they (Muslims) captured some
females and intended to have sexual relation with them without
impregnating them. So they asked the Prophet about coitus interrupt us.
The Prophet said, "It is better that you should not do it, for Allah has written
whom He is going to create till the Day of Resurrection." Qaza'a said, "I
heard Abu Sa'id saying that the Prophet said, 'No soul is ordained to be
created but Allah will create it."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 507:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "Allah will gather the believers on the Day of Resurrection
in the same way (as they are gathered in this life), and they will say, 'Let us
ask someone to intercede for us with our Lord that He may relieve us from
this place of ours.' Then they will go to Adam and say, 'O Adam! Don't you
see the people (people's condition)? Allah created you with His Own Hands
and ordered His angels to prostrate before you, and taught you the names
of all the things. Please intercede for us with our Lord so that He may relieve
us from this place of ours.' Adam will say, 'I am not fit for this undertaking'
and mention to them the mistakes he had committed, and add, "But you d
better go to Noah as he was the first Apostle sent by Allah to the people of
the Earth.' They will go to Noah who will reply, 'I am not fit for this
undertaking,' and mention the mistake which he made, and add, 'But you'd
better go to Abraham, Khalil Ar-Rahman.'
They will go to Abraham who will reply, 'I am not fit for this undertaking,'
and mention to them the mistakes he made, and add, 'But you'd better go
to Moses, a slave whom Allah gave the Torah and to whom He spoke
directly' They will go to Moses who will reply, 'I am not fit for this
undertaking,' and mention to them the mistakes he made, and add, 'You'd
better go to Jesus, Allah's slave and His Apostle and His Word (Be: And it
was) and a soul created by Him.' They will go to Jesus who will say, 'I am not
fit for this undertaking, but you'd better go to Muhammad whose sins of the
past and the future had been forgiven (by Allah).' So they will come to me
and I will ask the permission of my Lord, and I will be permitted (to present
myself) before Him. When I see my Lord, I will fall down in (prostration)
before Him and He will leave me (in prostration) as long as He wishes, and
then it will be said to me, 'O Muhammad! Raise your head and speak, for you
will be listened to; and ask, for you will be granted (your request); and
intercede, for your intercession will be accepted.' I will then raise my head
and praise my Lord with certain praises which He has taught me, and then I
will intercede. Allah will allow me to intercede (for a certain kind of people)
and will fix a limit whom I will admit into Paradise.
I will come back again, and when I see my Lord (again), I will fall down in
prostration before Him, and He will leave me (in prostration) as long as He
wishes, and then He will say, 'O Muhammad! Raise your head and speak, for
you will be listened to; and ask, for you will be granted (your request); and
intercede, for your intercession will be accepted.' I will then praise my Lord
with certain praises which He has taught me, and then I will intercede. Allah
will allow me to intercede (for a certain kind of people) and will fix a limit to
whom I will admit into Paradise, I will return again, and when I see my Lord, I
will fall down (in prostration) and He will leave me (in prostration) as long as
He wishes, and then He will say, 'O Muhammad! Raise your head and speak,
for you will be listened to, and ask, for you will be granted (your request);
and intercede, for your intercession will be accepted.' I will then praise my
Lord with certain praises which He has taught me, and then I will intercede.
Allah will allow me to intercede (for a certain kind of people) and will fix a
limit to whom I will admit into Paradise. I will come back and say, 'O my
Lord! None remains in Hell (Fire) but those whom Qur'an has imprisoned
therein and for whom eternity in Hell (Fire) has become inevitable.' "
The Prophet added, "There will come out of Hell (Fire) everyone who says:
'La ilaha illal-lah,' and has in his heart good equal to the weight of a barley
grain. Then there will come out of Hell (Fire) everyone who says: ' La ilaha
illal-lah,' and has in his heart good equal to the weight of a wheat grain.
Then there will come out of Hell (Fire) everyone who says: 'La ilaha illal-lah,'
and has in his heart good equal to the weight of an atom (or a smallest
ant)."
Volume 9, Book 93, Number 508:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah's Hand is full, and (its fullness) is not affected by
the continuous spending, day and night." He also said, "Do you see what He
has spent since He created the Heavens and the Earth? Yet all that has not
decreased what is in His Hand." He also said, "His Throne is over the water
and in His other Hand is the balance (of Justice) and He raises and lowers
(whomever He will)." (See Hadith No. 206, Vol. 6)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 509:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "On the Day of Resurrection, Allah will grasp the whole
Earth by His Hand, and all the Heavens in His right, and then He will say, 'I am
the King." Abu Huraira said, "Allah's Apostle said," Allah will grasp the
Earth...' "

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 510:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
A Jew came to the Prophet and said, "O Muhammad! Allah will hold the
heavens on a Finger, and the mountains on a Finger, and the trees on a
Finger, and all the creation on a Finger, and then He will say, 'I am the King.'
" On that Allah's Apostle smiled till his premolar teeth became visible, and
then recited:-'No just estimate have they made of Allah such as due to him....(39.67)
'Abdullah added: Allah's Apostle smiled (at the Jew's statement) expressing
his wonder and believe in what was said.

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 511:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
A man from the people of the scripture came to the Prophet and said, "O
Abal-Qasim! Allah will hold the Heavens upon a Finger, and the Earth on a
Finger and the land on a Finger, and all the creation on a Finger, and will say,
'I am the King! I am the King!' " I saw the Prophet (after hearing that),
smiling till his premolar teeth became visible, and he then recited: -- 'No just
estimate have they made of Allah such as due to him... (39.67)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 512:
Narrated Al-Mughira:
Sa'd bin 'Ubada said, "If I saw a man with my wife, I would strike him
(behead him) with the blade of my sword." This news reached Allah's
Apostle who then said, "You people are astonished at Sa'd's Ghira. By Allah,
I have more Ghira than he, and Allah has more Ghira than I, and because of
Allah's Ghira, He has made unlawful Shameful deeds and sins (illegal sexual
intercourse etc.) done in open and in secret. And there is none who likes
that the people should repent to Him and beg His pardon than Allah, and for
this reason He sent the warners and the givers of good news. And there is
none who likes to be praised more than Allah does, and for this reason, Allah
promised to grant Paradise (to the doers of good)." 'Abdul Malik said, "No
person has more Ghira than Allah."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 513:
Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:
The Prophet said to a man, "Have you got anything of the Qur'an?" The man
said, "Yes, such-and-such Sura, and such-and-such Sura," naming the Suras.

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 514:
Narrated 'Imran bin Hussain:
While I was with the Prophet , some people from Bani Tamim came to him.
The Prophet said, "O Bani Tamim! Accept the good news!" They said, "You
have given us the good news; now give us (something)." (After a while)
some Yemenites entered, and he said to them, "O the people of Yemen!
Accept the good news, as Bani Tamim have refused it. " They said, "We
accept it, for we have come to you to learn the Religion. So we ask you what
the beginning of this universe was." The Prophet said "There was Allah and
nothing else before Him and His Throne was over the water, and He then
created the Heavens and the Earth and wrote everything in the Book." Then
a man came to me and said, 'O Imran! Follow your she-camel for it has run
away!" So I set out seeking it, and behold, it was beyond the mirage! By
Allah, I wished that it (my she-camel) had gone but that I had not left (the
gathering). "

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 515:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "The Right (Hand) of Allah Is full, and (Its fullness) is not
affected by the continuous spending night and day. Do you see what He has
spent since He created the Heavens and the Earth? Yet all that has not
decreased what is in His Right Hand. His Throne is over the water and in His
other Hand is the Bounty or the Power to bring about death, and He raises
some people and brings others down." (See Hadith No. 508)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 516:
Narrated Anas:
Zaid bin Haritha came to the Prophet complaining about his wife. The
Prophet kept on saying (to him), "Be afraid of Allah and keep your wife."
Aisha said, "If Allah's Apostle were to conceal anything (of the Quran he
would have concealed this Verse." Zainab used to boast before the wives of
the Prophet and used to say, "You were given in marriage by your families,
while I was married (to the Prophet) by Allah from over seven Heavens."
And Thabit recited, "The Verse:-- 'But (O Muhammad) you did hide in your
heart that which Allah was about to make manifest, you did fear the people,'
(33.37) was revealed in connection with Zainab and Zaid bin Haritha."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 517:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The Verse of Al-Hijab (veiling of women) was revealed in connection with
Zainab bint Jahsh. (On the day of her marriage with him) the Prophet gave a
wedding banquet with bread and meat; and she used to boast before other
wives of the Prophet and used to say, "Allah married me (to the Prophet in
the Heavens."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 518:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "When Allah had finished His creation, He wrote over his
Throne: 'My Mercy preceded My Anger.'

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 519:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Whoever believes in Allah and His Apostle offers prayers
perfectly and fasts (the month of) Ramadan then it is incumbent upon Allah
to admit him into Paradise, whether he emigrates for Allah's cause or stays
in the land where he was born." They (the companions of the Prophet) said,
"O Allah's Apostle! Should we not inform the people of that?" He said,
"There are one-hundred degrees in Paradise which Allah has prepared for
those who carry on Jihad in His Cause. The distance between every two
degrees is like the distance between the sky and the Earth, so if you ask
Allah for anything, ask Him for the Firdaus, for it is the last part of Paradise
and the highest part of Paradise, and at its top there is the Throne of
Beneficent, and from it gush forth the rivers of Paradise."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 520:
Narrated Abu Dharr:
I entered the mosque while Allah's Apostle was sitting there. When the sun
had set, the Prophet said, "O Abu Dharr! Do you know where this (sun)
goes?" I said, "Allah and His Apostle know best." He said, "It goes and asks
permission to prostrate, and it is allowed, and (one day) it, as if being
ordered to return whence it came, then it will rise from the west." Then the
Prophet recited, "That: "And the sun runs on its fixed course (for a term
decreed)," (36.38) as it is recited by 'Abdullah.

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 521:
Narrated Zaid bin Thabit:
Abu Bakr sent for me, so I collected the Qur'an till I found the last part of
Surat-at-Tauba with Abi Khuzaima Al-Ansari and did not find it with anybody
else. (The Verses are): -- 'Verily, there has come to you an Apostle
(Muhammad) from amongst yourselves..(till the end of Surat Bara'a) (i.e.,
At-Tauba).' (9.128-129)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 522:
Narrated Yunus:
(As 521).

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 523:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet used to say at the time of difficulty, 'La ilaha il-lallah Al-'AlimulHalim. La-ilaha il-lallah Rabul- Arsh-al-Azim, La ilaha-il-lallah Rabus-Samawati
Rab-ul-Ard; wa Rab-ul-Arsh Al-Karim.' (See Hadith No. 356 and 357, Vol. 8)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 524:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said, "The people will fall unconscious on the Day of
Resurrection, then suddenly I will see Moses holding one of the pillars of the
Throne." Abu Huraira said: The Prophet said, "I will be the first person to be
resurrected and will see Moses holding the Throne."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 525:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "(A group of) angels stay with you at night and
(another group of) angels by daytime, and both groups gather at the time of
the 'Asr and Fajr prayers. Then those angels who have stayed with you
overnight, ascend (to Heaven) and Allah asks them (about you) ---- and He
knows everything about you. "In what state did you leave My slaves?' The
angels reply, 'When we left them, they were praying, and when we reached
them they were praying.' "

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 525y:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If somebody gives in charity something equal to a date
from his honestly earned money ----for nothing ascends to Allah except
good---- then Allah will take it in His Right (Hand) and bring it up for its
owner as anyone of you brings up a baby horse, till it becomes like a
mountain." Abu Huraira said: The Prophet. said, "Nothing ascends to Allah
except good."
Volume 9, Book 93, Number 526:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Allah's Apostle used to say at the time of difficulty, "None has the right to be
worshipped but Allah, the Majestic, the Most Forbearing. None has the right
to be worshipped but Allah, the Lord of the Tremendous Throne. None has
the right to be worshipped but Allah, the Lord of the Heavens and the Lord
of the Honourable Throne. (See Hadith No. 357, Vol. 8)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 527:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
When 'Ali was in Yemen, he sent some gold in its ore to the Prophet. The
Prophet distributed it among Al-Aqra' bin Habis Al-Hanzali who belonged to
Bani Mujashi, 'Uyaina bin Badr Al-Fazari, 'Alqama bin 'Ulatha Al-'Amiri, who
belonged to the Bani Kilab tribe and Zaid AI-Khail At-Ta'i who belonged to
Bani Nabhan. So the Quraish and the Ansar became angry and said, "He
gives to the chiefs of Najd and leaves us!" The Prophet said, "I just wanted
to attract and unite their hearts (make them firm in Islam)." Then there
came a man with sunken eyes, bulging forehead, thick beard, fat raised
cheeks, and clean-shaven head, and said, "O Muhammad! Be afraid of Allah!
" The Prophet said, "Who would obey Allah if I disobeyed Him? (Allah). He
trusts me over the people of the earth, but you do not trust me?" A man
from the people (present then), who, I think, was Khalid bin Al-Walid, asked
for permission to kill him, but the Prophet prevented him. When the man
went away, the Prophet said, "Out of the offspring of this man, there will be
people who will recite the Quran but it will not go beyond their throats, and
they will go out of Islam as an arrow goes out through the game, and they
will kill the Muslims and leave the idolators. Should I live till they appear, I
would kill them as the Killing of the nation of 'Ad."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 528:
Narrated Abu Dharr:
I asked the Prophet regarding the Verse:--'And the sun runs on its fixed
course for a term decreed for it.' (36.28) He said, "Its fixed course is
underneath Allah's Throne."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 529:
Narrated Jarir:
We were sitting with the Prophet and he looked at the moon on the night of
the full-moon and said, "You people will see your Lord as you see this full
moon, and you will have no trouble in seeing Him, so if you can avoid
missing (through sleep or business, etc.) a prayer before sunrise (Fajr) and a
prayer before sunset (Asr) you must do so." (See Hadith No. 529, Vol. 1)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 530:
Narrated Jarir bin 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "You will definitely see your Lord with your own eyes."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 531:
Narrated Jarir:
Allah's Apostle came out to us on the night of the full moon and said, "You
will see your Lord on the Day of Resurrection as you see this (full moon) and
you will have no difficulty in seeing Him."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 532c:
Narrated 'Ata' bin Yazid Al-Laithi:
On the authority of Abu Huraira: The people said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall
we see our Lord on the Day of Resurrection?" The Prophet said, "Do you
have any difficulty in seeing the moon on a full moon night?" They said, "No,
O Allah's Apostle." He said, "Do you have any difficulty in seeing the sun
when there are no clouds?" They said, "No, O Allah's Apostle." He said, "So
you will see Him, like that. Allah will gather all the people on the Day of
Resurrection, and say, 'Whoever worshipped something (in the world)
should follow (that thing),' so, whoever worshipped the sun will follow the
sun, and whoever worshiped the moon will follow the moon, and whoever
used to worship certain (other false) deities, he will follow those deities.
And there will remain only this nation with its good people (or its
hypocrites). (The sub-narrator, Ibrahim is in doubt.) Allah will come to them
and say, 'I am your Lord.' They will (deny Him and) say, 'We will stay here till
our Lord comes, for when our Lord comes, we will recognize Him.' So Allah
will come to them in His appearance which they know, and will say, 'I am
your Lord.' They will say, 'You are our Lord,' so they will follow Him.
Then a bridge will be laid across Hell (Fire)' I and my followers will be the
first ones to go across it and none will speak on that Day except the
Apostles. And the invocation of the Apostles on that Day will be, 'O Allah,
save! Save!' In Hell (or over The Bridge) there will be hooks like the thorns of
As-Sa'dan (thorny plant). Have you seen As-Sa'dan? " They replied, "Yes, O
Allah's Apostle!" He said, "So those hooks look like the thorns of As-Sa'dan,
but none knows how big they are except Allah. Those hooks will snap the
people away according to their deeds. Some of the people will stay in Hell
(be destroyed) because of their (evil) deeds, and some will be cut or torn by
the hooks (and fall into Hell) and some will be punished and then relieved.
When Allah has finished His Judgments among the people, He will take
whomever He will out of Hell through His Mercy. He will then order the
angels to take out of the Fire all those who used to worship none but Allah
from among those whom Allah wanted to be merciful to and those who
testified (in the world) that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah.
The angels will recognize them in the Fire by the marks of prostration (on
their foreheads), for the Fire will eat up all the human body except the mark
caused by prostration as Allah has forbidden the Fire to eat the mark of
prostration. They will come out of the (Hell) Fire, completely burnt and then
the water of life will be poured over them and they will grow under it as
does a seed that comes in the mud of the torrent.
Then Allah will finish the judgments among the people, and there will remain
one man facing the (Hell) Fire and he will be the last person among the
people of Hell to enter Paradise. He will say, 'O my Lord! Please turn my face
away from the fire because its air has hurt me and its severe heat has burnt
me.' So he will invoke Allah in the way Allah will wish him to invoke, and
then Allah will say to him, 'If I grant you that, will you then ask for anything
else?' He will reply, 'No, by Your Power, (Honor) I will not ask You for
anything else.' He will give his Lord whatever promises and covenants Allah
will demand.
So Allah will turn his face away from Hell (Fire). When he will face Paradise
and will see it, he will remain quiet for as long as Allah will wish him to
remain quiet, then he will say, 'O my Lord! Bring me near to the gate of
Paradise.' Allah will say to him, 'Didn't you give your promises and covenants
that you would never ask for anything more than what you had been given?
Woe on you, O Adam's son! How treacherous you are!' He will say, 'O my
lord,' and will keep on invoking Allah till He says to him, 'If I give what you
are asking, will you then ask for anything else?' He will reply, 'No, by Your
(Honor) Power, I will not ask for anything else.'
Then he will give covenants and promises to Allah and then Allah will bring
him near to the gate of Paradise. When he stands at the gate of Paradise,
Paradise will be opened and spread before him, and he will see its splendor
and pleasures whereupon he will remain quiet as long as Allah will wish him
to remain quiet, and then he will say, O my Lord! Admit me into Paradise.'
Allah will say, 'Didn't you give your covenants and promises that you would
not ask for anything more than what you had been given?' Allah will say,
'Woe on you, O Adam's son! How treacherous you are! '
The man will say, 'O my Lord! Do not make me the most miserable of Your
creation,' and he will keep on invoking Allah till Allah will laugh because of
his sayings, and when Allah will laugh because of him, He will say to him,
'Enter Paradise,' and when he will enter it, Allah will say to him, 'Wish for
anything.' So he will ask his Lord, and he will wish for a great number of
things, for Allah Himself will remind him to wish for certain things by saying,
'(Wish for) so-and-so.' When there is nothing more to wish for, Allah will say,
'This is for you, and its equal (is for you) as well."
'Ata' bin Yazid added: Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri who was present with Abu
Huraira, did not deny whatever the latter said, but when Abu Huraira said
that Allah had said, "That is for you and its equal as well," Abu Sa'id AlKhudri said, "And ten times as much, O Abu Huraira!" Abu Huraira said, "I do
not remember, except his saying, 'That is for you and its equal as well.'" Abu
Sa'id Al-Khudri then said, "I testify that I remember the Prophet saying, 'That
is for you, and ten times as much.' ' Abu Huraira then added, "That man will
be the last person of the people of Paradise to enter Paradise."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 532s:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
We said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall we see our Lord on the Day of
Resurrection?" He said, "Do you have any difficulty in seeing the sun and the
moon when the sky is clear?" We said, "No." He said, "So you will have no
difficulty in seeing your Lord on that Day as you have no difficulty in seeing
the sun and the moon (in a clear sky)." The Prophet then said, "Somebody
will then announce, 'Let every nation follow what they used to worship.' So
the companions of the cross will go with their cross, and the idolators (will
go) with their idols, and the companions of every god (false deities) (will go)
with their god, till there remain those who used to worship Allah, both the
obedient ones and the mischievous ones, and some of the people of the
Scripture. Then Hell will be presented to them as if it were a mirage. Then it
will be said to the Jews, "What did you use to worship?' They will reply, 'We
used to worship Ezra, the son of Allah.' It will be said to them, 'You are liars,
for Allah has neither a wife nor a son. What do you want (now)?' They will
reply, 'We want You to provide us with water.' Then it will be said to them
'Drink,' and they will fall down in Hell (instead). Then it will be said to the
Christians, 'What did you use to worship?'
They will reply, 'We used to worship Messiah, the son of Allah.' It will be
said, 'You are liars, for Allah has neither a wife nor a son. What: do you want
(now)?' They will say, 'We want You to provide us with water.' It will be said
to them, 'Drink,' and they will fall down in Hell (instead). When there remain
only those who used to worship Allah (Alone), both the obedient ones and
the mischievous ones, it will be said to them, 'What keeps you here when all
the people have gone?' They will say, 'We parted with them (in the world)
when we were in greater need of them than we are today, we heard the call
of one proclaiming, 'Let every nation follow what they used to worship,' and
now we are waiting for our Lord.' Then the Almighty will come to them in a
shape other than the one which they saw the first time, and He will say, 'I
am your Lord,' and they will say, 'You are not our Lord.' And none will speak:
to Him then but the Prophets, and then it will be said to them, 'Do you know
any sign by which you can recognize Him?' They will say. 'The Shin,' and so
Allah will then uncover His Shin whereupon every believer will prostrate
before Him and there will remain those who used to prostrate before Him
just for showing off and for gaining good reputation. These people will try
to prostrate but their backs will be rigid like one piece of a wood (and they
will not be able to prostrate). Then the bridge will be laid across Hell." We,
the companions of the Prophet said, "O Allah's Apostle! What is the bridge?'
He said, "It is a slippery (bridge) on which there are clamps and (Hooks like)
a thorny seed that is wide at one side and narrow at the other and has
thorns with bent ends. Such a thorny seed is found in Najd and is called AsSa'dan. Some of the believers will cross the bridge as quickly as the wink of
an eye, some others as quick as lightning, a strong wind, fast horses or shecamels. So some will be safe without any harm; some will be safe after
receiving some scratches, and some will fall down into Hell (Fire). The last
person will cross by being dragged (over the bridge)." The Prophet said,
"You (Muslims) cannot be more pressing in claiming from me a right that
has been clearly proved to be yours than the believers in interceding with
Almighty for their (Muslim) brothers on that Day, when they see themselves
safe.
They will say, 'O Allah! (Save) our brothers (for they) used to pray with us,
fast with us and also do good deeds with us.' Allah will say, 'Go and take out
(of Hell) anyone in whose heart you find faith equal to the weight of one
(gold) Dinar.' Allah will forbid the Fire to burn the faces of those sinners.
They will go to them and find some of them in Hell (Fire) up to their feet,
and some up to the middle of their legs. So they will take out those whom
they will recognize and then they will return, and Allah will say (to them),
'Go and take out (of Hell) anyone in whose heart you find faith equal to the
weight of one half Dinar.' They will take out whomever they will recognize
and return, and then Allah will say, 'Go and take out (of Hell) anyone in
whose heart you find faith equal to the weight of an atom (or a smallest
ant), and so they will take out all those whom they will recognize." Abu Sa'id
said: If you do not believe me then read the Holy Verse:-'Surely! Allah wrongs not even of the weight of an atom (or a smallest ant)
but if there is any good (done) He doubles it.' (4.40) The Prophet added,
"Then the prophets and Angels and the believers will intercede, and (last of
all) the Almighty (Allah) will say, 'Now remains My Intercession. He will then
hold a handful of the Fire from which He will take out some people whose
bodies have been burnt, and they will be thrown into a river at the entrance
of Paradise, called the water of life.
They will grow on its banks, as a seed carried by the torrent grows. You have
noticed how it grows beside a rock or beside a tree, and how the side facing
the sun is usually green while the side facing the shade is white. Those
people will come out (of the River of Life) like pearls, and they will have
(golden) necklaces, and then they will enter Paradise whereupon the people
of Paradise will say, 'These are the people emancipated by the Beneficent.
He has admitted them into Paradise without them having done any good
deeds and without sending forth any good (for themselves).' Then it will be
said to them, 'For you is what you have seen and its equivalent as well.'"

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 532v:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "The believers will be kept (waiting) on the Day of
Resurrection so long that they will become worried and say, "Let us ask
somebody to intercede far us with our Lord so that He may relieve us from
our place.
Then they will go to Adam and say, 'You are Adam, the father of the people.
Allah created you with His Own Hand and made you reside in His Paradise
and ordered His angels to prostrate before you, and taught you the names
of all things will you intercede for us with your Lord so that He may relieve
us from this place of ours? Adam will say, 'I am not fit for this undertaking.'
He will mention his mistakes he had committed, i.e., his eating off the tree
though he had been forbidden to do so. He will add, 'Go to Noah, the first
prophet sent by Allah to the people of the Earth.' The people will go to Noah
who will say, 'I am not fit for this undertaking' He will mention his mistake
which he had done, i.e., his asking his Lord without knowledge.' He will say
(to them), 'Go to Abraham, Khalil Ar-Rahman.' They will go to Abraham who
will say, 'I am not fit for this undertaking. He would mention three words by
which he told a lie, and say (to them). 'Go to Moses, a slave whom Allah
gave the Torah and spoke to, directly and brought near Him, for
conversation.'
They will go to Moses who will say, 'I am not fit for this undertaking. He will
mention his mistake he made, i.e., killing a person, and will say (to them),
'Go to Jesus, Allah's slave and His Apostle, and a soul created by Him and His
Word.' (Be: And it was.) They will go to Jesus who will say, 'I am not fit for
this undertaking but you'd better go to Muhammad the slave whose past
and future sins have been forgiven by Allah.' So they will come to me, and I
will ask my Lord's permission to enter His House and then I will be
permitted. When I see Him I will fall down in prostration before Him, and He
will leave me (in prostration) as long as He will, and then He will say, 'O
Muhammad, lift up your head and speak, for you will be listened to, and
intercede, for your intercession will be accepted, and ask (for anything) for
it will be granted:' Then I will raise my head and glorify my Lord with certain
praises which He has taught me. Allah will put a limit for me (to intercede for
a certain type of people) I will take them out and make them enter
Paradise." (Qatada said: I heard Anas saying that), the Prophet said, "I will
go out and take them out of Hell (Fire) and let them enter Paradise, and
then I will return and ask my Lord for permission to enter His House and I
will be permitted.
When I will see Him I will fall down in prostration before Him and He will
leave me in prostration as long as He will let me (in that state), and then He
will say, 'O Muhammad, raise your head and speak, for you will be listened
to, and intercede, for your intercession will be accepted, and ask, your
request will be granted.' " The Prophet added, "So I will raise my head and
glorify and praise Him as He has taught me. Then I will intercede and He will
put a limit for me (to intercede for a certain type of people). I will take them
out and let them enter Paradise." (Qatada added: I heard Anas saying that)
the Prophet said, 'I will go out and take them out of Hell (Fire) and let them
enter Paradise, and I will return for the third time and will ask my Lord for
permission to enter His house, and I will be allowed to enter.
When I see Him, I will fall down in prostration before Him, and will remain in
prostration as long as He will, and then He will say, 'Raise your head, O
Muhammad, and speak, for you will be listened to, and intercede, for your
intercession will be accepted, and ask, for your request will be granted.' So I
will raise my head and praise Allah as He has taught me and then I will
intercede and He will put a limit for me (to intercede for a certain type of
people). I will take them out and let them enter Paradise." (Qatada said: I
heard Anas saying that) the Prophet said, "So I will go out and take them out
of Hell (Fire) and let them enter Paradise, till none will remain in the Fire
except those whom Quran will imprison (i.e., those who are destined for
eternal life in the fire)." The narrator then recited the Verse:-- "It may be that
your Lord will raise you to a Station of Praise and Glory.' (17.79) The narrator
added: This is the Station of Praise and Glory which Allah has promised to
your Prophet.

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 533:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle sent for the Ansar and gathered them in a tent and said to
them, "Be patient till you meet Allah and His Apostle, and I will be on the
lake-Tank (Al-Kauthar)."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 534:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Whenever the Prophet offered his Tahajjud prayer, he would say, "O Allah,
our Lord! All the praises are for You; You are the Keeper (Establisher or the
One Who looks after) of the Heavens and the Earth. All the Praises are for
You; You are the Light of the Heavens and the Earth and whatever is therein.
You are the Truth, and Your saying is the Truth, and Your promise is the
Truth, and the meeting with You is the Truth, and Paradise is the Truth, and
the (Hell) Fire is the Truth. O Allah! I surrender myself to You, and believe in
You, and I put my trust in You (solely depend upon). And to You I complain
of my opponents and with Your Evidence I argue. So please forgive the sins
which I have done in the past or I will do in the future, and also those (sins)
which I did in secret or in public, and that which You know better than I.
None has the right to be worshipped but You."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 535:
Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim:
Allah's Apostle said, "There will be none among you but his Lord will speak
to him, and there will be no interpreter between them nor a screen to
screen Him."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 536:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Qais:
The Prophet said, "(There will be) two Paradises of silver and all the utensils
and whatever is therein (will be of silver); and two Paradises of gold, and its
utensils and whatever therein (will be of gold), and there will be nothing to
prevent the people from seeing their Lord except the Cover of Majesty over
His Face in the Paradise of Eden (eternal bliss)."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 537:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
The Prophet said, "Whoever takes the property of a Muslim by taking a false
oath, will meet Allah Who will be angry with him." Then the Prophet recited
the Verse:-- 'Verily those who purchase a small gain at the cost of Allah's
Covenant and their oaths, they shall have no portion in the Hereafter,
neither will Allah speak to them, nor look at them.' (3.77)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 538:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "(There are) three (types of persons to whom) Allah will
neither speak to them on the Day of Resurrections, nor look at them (They
are):--(1) a man who takes a false oath that he has been offered for a
commodity a price greater than what he has actually been offered; (2) and a
man who takes a false oath after the 'Asr (prayer) in order to grab the
property of a Muslim through it; (3) and a man who forbids others to use the
remaining superfluous water. To such a man Allah will say on the Day of
Resurrection, 'Today I withhold My Blessings from you as you withheld the
superfluous part of that (water) which your hands did not create.' "

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 539:
Narrated Abu Bakra:
The Prophet said, "Time has come back to its original state which it had
when Allah created the Heavens and the Earth, the year is twelve months, of
which four are sacred; (and out of these four) three are in succession,
namely, Dhul-Qa'da, Dhul-Hijja and Muharram, and (the fourth one) Rajab
Mudar which is between Jumad (Ath-Tham) and Sha'ban." The Prophet then
asked us, "Which month is this?" We said, "Allah and His Apostle know (it)
better." He kept quiet so long that we thought he might call it by another
name. Then he said, "Isn't it Dhul-Hijja?" We said, "Yes." He asked "What
town is this?" We said, "Allah and His Apostle know (it) better.' Then he kept
quiet so long that we thought he might call it by another name. He then
said, "Isn't it the (forbidden) town (Mecca)?" We said, "Yes." He asked,
"What is the day today?" We said, "Allah and His Apostle know (it) better.
Then he kept quiet so long that we thought that he might call it by another
name. Then he said, "Isn't it the Day of An-Nahr (slaughtering of sacrifices)?"
We said, "Yes." Then he said, "Your blood (lives), your properties," (the sub
narrator Muhammad, said: I think he also said): "..and your honor) are as
sacred to one another like the sanctity of this Day of yours, in this town of
yours, in this month of yours.
You shall meet your Lord and He will ask you about your deeds. Beware!
Don't go astray after me by striking the necks of one another. Lo! It is
incumbent upon those who are present to inform it to those who are absent
for perhaps the informed one might comprehend it (understand it) better
than some of the present audience." Whenever the sub-narrator
Muhammad mentioned that statement, he would say, "The Prophet said the
truth.") And then the Prophet added, "No doubt! Haven't I conveyed Allah's
Message to you! No doubt! Haven't I conveyed Allah's Message to you?"

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 540:
Narrated Usama:
A son of one of the daughters of the Prophet was dying, so she sent a
person to call the Prophet. He sent (her a message), "What ever Allah takes
is for Him, and whatever He gives is for Him, and everything has a limited
fixed term (in this world) so she should be patient and hope for Allah's
reward." She then sent for him again, swearing that he should come. Allah's
Apostle got up, and so did Mu'adh bin Jabal, Ubai bin Ka'b and 'Ubada bin
As-Samit. When he entered (the house), they gave the child to Allah's
Apostle while its breath was disturbed in his chest. (The sub-narrator said: I
think he said, "...as if it was a water skin.") Allah's Apostle started weeping
whereupon Sa'd bin 'Ubada said, "Do you weep?" The Prophet said, "Allah is
merciful only to those of His slaves who are merciful (to others)."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 541:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Paradise and Hell (Fire) quarrelled in the presence of
their Lord. Paradise said, 'O Lord! What is wrong with me that only the poor
and humble people enter me ?' Hell (Fire) said, I have been favored with the
arrogant people.' So Allah said to Paradise, 'You are My Mercy,' and said to
Hell, 'You are My Punishment which I inflict upon whom I wish, and I shall fill
both of you.'" The Prophet added, "As for Paradise, (it will be filled with
good people) because Allah does not wrong any of His created things, and
He creates for Hell (Fire) whomever He will, and they will be thrown into it,
and it will say thrice, 'Is there any more, till Allah (will put) His Foot over it
and it will become full and its sides will come close to each other and it will
say, 'Qat! Qat! Qat! (Enough! Enough! Enough!) .

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 542:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "Some people who will be scorched by Hell (Fire) as a
punishment for sins they have committed, and then Allah will admit them
into Paradise by the grant of His Mercy. These people will be called, 'AlJahannamiyyLin' (the people of Hell)."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 543:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
A Jewish Rabbi came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Muhammad! Allah will
put the Heavens on one finger and the earth on one finger, and the trees
and the rivers on one finger, and the rest of the creation on one finger, and
then will say, pointing out with His Hand, 'I am the King.' "On that Allah's
Apostle smiled and said, "No just estimate have they made of Allah such as
due to Him. (39.67)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 544:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Once I stayed overnight at the house of (my aunt ) Maimuna while the
Prophet was with her, to see how was the night prayer of Allah s Apostle
Allah's Apostle talked to his wife for a while and then slept. When it was the
last third of the night (or part of it), the Prophet got up and looked towards
the sky and recited the Verse:-- 'Verily! In the creation of the Heavens and
the Earth....there are indeed signs for the men of understanding.' (3.190)
Then He got up and performed the ablution, brushed his teeth and offered
eleven Rakat. Then Bilal pronounced the Adhan whereupon the Prophet
offered a two-Rak'at (Sunna) prayer and went out to lead the people in Fajr
(morning compulsory congregational prayer.

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 545:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "When Allah created the creations, He wrote with Him
on His Throne: 'My Mercy has preceded My Anger."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 546:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud:
Allah's Apostle the true and truly inspired, narrated to us, "The creation of
everyone of you starts with the process of collecting the material for his
body within forty days and forty nights in the womb of his mother. Then he
becomes a clot of thick blood for a similar period (40 days) and then he
becomes like a piece of flesh for a similar period. Then an angel is sent to
him (by Allah) and the angel is allowed (ordered) to write four things; his
livelihood, his (date of) death, his deeds, and whether he will be a wretched
one or a blessed one (in the Hereafter) and then the soul is breathed into
him. So one of you may do (good) deeds characteristic of the people of
Paradise so much that there is nothing except a cubit between him and
Paradise but then what has been written for him decides his behavior and he
starts doing (evil) deeds characteristic of the people of Hell (Fire) and
(ultimately) enters Hell (Fire); and one of you may do (evil) deeds
characteristic of the people of Hell (Fire) so much so that there is nothing
except a cubit between him and Hell (Fire), then what has been written for
him decides his behavior and he starts doing (good) deeds characteristic of
the people of Paradise and ultimately) enters Paradise." (See Hadith No.
430, Vol. 4)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 547:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said, "O Gabriel, what prevents you. from visiting us more often
than you do?" Then this Verse was revealed:--'And we angels descend not
but by Command of your Lord. To Him belongs what is before us and what is
behind us..' (19.64) So this was the answer to Muhammad.

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 548:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
While I was walking with Allah's Apostle in one of the fields of Medina and
he was walking leaning on a stick, he passed a group of Jews. Some of them
said to the others, "Ask him (the Prophet) about the spirit." Others said, "Do
not ask him." But they asked him and he stood leaning on the stick and I was
standing behind him and I thought that he was being divinely inspired. Then
he said, "They ask you concerning the spirit say: The spirit, its knowledge is
with My Lord. And of knowledge you (O men!) have been given only a little."
...(17.85) On that some of the Jews said to the others, "Didn't we tell you not
to ask?"

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 549:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah guarantees to the person who carries out Jihad
for His Cause and nothing compelled him to go out but the Jihad in His
Cause, and belief in His Words, that He will either admit him into Paradise or
return him with his reward or the booty he has earned to his residence from
where he went out." (See Hadith No. 555).

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 550:
Narrated Abu Musa:
A man came to the Prophet and said, "A man fights for pride and
haughtiness another fights for bravery, and another fights for showing off;
which of these (cases) is in Allah's Cause?" The Prophet said, "The one who
fights that Allah's Word (Islam) should be superior, fights in Allah's Cause."
(See Hadith No. 65, Vol. 4)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 551:
Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Some people from my followers will continue
to be victorious over others till Allah's Order (The Hour) is established." (See
Hadith No. 414)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 552:
Narrated Muawiya:
I heard the Prophet saying, "A group of my followers will keep on following
Allah's Laws strictly and they will not be harmed by those who will
disbelieve them or stand against them till Allah's Order (The Hour) will come
while they will be in that state."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 553:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet stood before Musailama (the liar) who was sitting with his
companions then, and said to him, "If you ask me for this piece (of palm-leaf
stalk), even then I would not give it to you. You cannot avoid what Allah has
ordained for you, and if you turn away from Islam, Allah will surely ruin you!
"

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 554:
Narrated Ibn Mas'ud:
While I was walking in company with the Prophet in one of the fields of
Medina, the Prophet was reclining on a palm leave stalk which he carried
with him. We passed by a group of Jews. Some of them said to the others,
"Ask him about the spirit." The others said, "Do not ask him, lest he would
say something that you hate." Some of them said, "We will ask him." So a
man from among them stood up and said, 'O Abal-Qasim! What is the spirit?"
The Prophet kept quiet and I knew that he was being divinely inspired. Then
he said: "They ask you concerning the Spirit, Say: The Spirit; its knowledge is
with my Lord. And of knowledge you (mankind) have been given only a
little." (17.85)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 555:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah guarantees (the person who carries out Jihad in
His Cause and nothing compelled him to go out but Jihad in His Cause and
the belief in His Word) that He will either admit him into Paradise
(Martyrdom) or return him with reward or booty he has earned to his
residence from where he went out."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 556:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle said, "Whenever anyone of you invoke Allah for something,
he should be firm in his asking, and he should not say: 'If You wish, give
me...' for none can compel Allah to do something against His Will."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 557:
Narrated 'Ali bin Abi Talib:
That one night Allah's Apostle visited him and Fatima, the daughter of
Allah's Apostle and said to them, "Won 't you offer (night) prayer?.. 'Ali
added: I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Our souls are in the Hand of Allah and
when He Wishes to bring us to life, He does." Then Allah's Apostle went
away when I said so and he did not give any reply. Then I heard him on
leaving while he was striking his thighs, saying, 'But man is, more
quarrelsome than anything.' (18.54)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 558:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "The example of a believer is that of a fresh green plant
the leaves of which move in whatever direction the wind forces them to
move and when the wind becomes still, it stand straight. Such is the
similitude of the believer: He is disturbed by calamities (but is like the fresh
plant he regains his normal state soon). And the example of a disbeliever is
that of a pine tree (which remains) hard and straight till Allah cuts it down
when He will." (See Hadith No. 546 and 547, Vol. 7).

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 559:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
I heard Allah's Apostle while he was standing on the pulpit, saying, "The
remaining period of your stay (on the earth) in comparison to the nations
before you, is like the period between the 'Asr prayer and sunset. The
people of the Torah were given the Torah and they acted upon it till midday,
and then they were worn out and were given for their labor, one Qirat each.
Then the people of the Gospel were given the Gospel and they acted upon it
till the time of the 'Asr prayer, and then they were worn out and were given
(for their labor), one Qirat each. Then you people were given the Quran and
you acted upon it till sunset and so you were given two Qirats each (double
the reward of the previous nations)." Then the people of the Torah said, 'O
our Lord! These people have done a little labor (much less than we) but have
taken a greater reward.' Allah said, 'Have I withheld anything from your
reward?' They said, 'No.' Then Allah said, 'That is My Favor which I bestow
on whom I wish.' "

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 560:
Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit:
I, along with a group of people, gave the pledge of allegiance to Allah's
Apostle. He said, "I take your Pledge on the condition that you (1) will not
join partners in worship with Allah, (2) will not steal, (3) will not commit
illegal sexual intercourse, (4) will not kill your offspring, (5) will not slander,
(6) and will not disobey me when I order you to do good. Whoever among
you will abide by his pledge, his reward will be with Allah, and whoever
commits any of those sins and receives the punishment in this world, that
punishment will be an expiation for his sins and purification; but if Allah
screens him, then it will be up to Allah to punish him if He will or excuse Him,
if He will."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 561:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Prophet Solomon who had sixty wives, once said, "Tonight I will have
sexual relation (sleep) with all my wives so that each of them will become
pregnant and bring forth (a boy who will grow into) a cavalier and will fight
in Allah's Cause." So he slept with his wives and none of them (conceived
and) delivered (a child) except one who brought a half (body) boy
(deformed). Allah's Prophet said, "If Solomon had said; 'If Allah Will,' then
each of those women would have delivered a (would-be) cavalier to fight in
Allah's Cause." (See Hadith No. 74 A, Vol. 4).

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 562:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
Allah's Apostle entered upon a sick bedouin in whom he went to visit and
said to him, "Don't worry, Tahur (i.e., your illness will be a means of
cleansing of your sins), if Allah Will." The bedouin said, "Tahur! No, but it is a
fever that is burning in the body of an old man and it will make him visit his
grave." The Prophet said, "Then it is so."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 563:
Narrated Abu Qatada:
When the people slept till so late that they did not offer the (morning)
prayer, the Prophet said, "Allah captured your souls (made you sleep) when
He willed, and returned them (to your bodies) when He willed." So the
people got up and went to answer the call of nature, performed ablution, till
the sun had risen and it had become white, then the Prophet got up and
offered the prayer.

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 564:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
"A man from the Muslims and a man from the Jews quarrelled, and the
Muslim said, "By Him Who gave superiority to Muhammad over all the
people!" The Jew said, "By Him Who gave superiority to Moses over all the
people!' On that the Muslim lifted his hand and slapped the Jew. The Jew
went to Allah's Apostle and informed him of all that had happened between
him and the Muslim. The Prophet said, "Do not give me superiority over
Moses, for the people will fall unconscious on the Day of Resurrection, I will
be the first to regain consciousness and behold, Moses will be standing
there, holding the side of the Throne. I will not know whether he has been
one of those who have fallen unconscious and then regained consciousness
before me, or if he has been one of those exempted by Allah (from falling
unconscious)." (See Hadith No. 524, Vol. 8)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 565:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
Allah's Apostle said, "Ad-Dajjal will come to Medina and find the angels
guarding it. If Allah will, neither Ad-Dajjal nor plague will be able to come
near it."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 566:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "For every Prophet there is one invocation which is
definitely fulfilled by Allah, and I wish, if Allah will, to keep my that (special)
invocation as to be the intercession for my followers on the Day of
Resurrection."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 567:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "While I was sleeping, I saw myself (in a dream)
standing by a well. I drew from it as much water as Allah wished me to draw,
and then Ibn Quhafa (Abu Bakr) took the bucket from me and drew one or
two buckets, and there was weakness in his drawing----may Allah forgive
him! Then 'Umar took the bucket which turned into something like a big
drum. I had never seen a powerful man among the people working as
perfectly and vigorously as he did. (He drew so much water that) the people
drank to their satisfaction and watered their camels that knelt down there.
(See Hadith No. 16, Vol. 5)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 568:
Narrated Abu Musa:
Whenever a beggar or a person in need of something came to the Prophet ,
he used to say (to his companions), "Intercede (for him) and you will be
rewarded for that, and Allah will fulfill what He will through His Apostle's
tongue."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 569:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "None of you should say: 'O Allah! Forgive me if You wish,'
or 'Bestow Your Mercy on me if You wish,' or 'Provide me with means of
subsistence if You wish,' but he should be firm in his request, for Allah does
what He will and nobody can force Him (to do anything)."
Volume 9, Book 93, Number 570:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
That he differed with Al-Hurr bin Qais bin Hisn Al-Fazari about the
companion of Moses, (i.e., whether he was Kha,dir or not). Ubai bin Ka'b AlAnsari passed by them and Ibn 'Abbas called him saying, 'My friend (Hur)
and I have differed about Moses' Companion whom Moses asked the way to
meet. Did you hear Allah's Apostle mentioning anything about him?" Ubai
said, "Yes, I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "While Moses was sitting in the
company of some Israelites a man came to him and asked, 'Do you know
Someone who is more learned than you (Moses)?' Moses said, 'No.' So Allah
sent the Divine inspiration to Moses:-'Yes, Our Slave Khadir is more learned than you' Moses asked Allah how to
meet him ( Khadir) So Allah made the fish as a sign for him and it was said to
him, 'When you lose the fish, go back (to the place where you lose it) and
you will meet him.' So Moses went on looking for the sign of the fish in the
sea. The boy servant of Moses (who was accompanying him) said to him,
'Do you remember (what happened) when we betook ourselves to the rock?
I did indeed forget to tell you (about) the fish. None but Satan made me
forget to tell you about it' (18.63) Moses said:
'That is what we have been seeking." Sa they went back retracing their
footsteps. (18.64). So they both found Kadir (there) and then happened
what Allah mentioned about them (in the Quran)!' (See 18.60-82)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 571:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If Allah will, tomorrow we will encamp in Khaif Bani
Kinana, the place where the pagans took the oath of Kufr (disbelief) against
the Prophet. He meant Al-Muhassab. (See Hadith No. 659, Vol. 2)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 572:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:
The Prophet besieged the people of Ta'if, but he did not conquer it. He said,
"Tomorrow, if Allah will, we will return home. On this the Muslims said,
"Then we return without conquering it?" He said, 'Then carry on fighting
tomorrow." The next day many of them were injured. The Prophet said, "If
Allah will, we will return home tomorrow." It seemed that statement
pleased them whereupon Allah's Apostle smiled.

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 573:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "When Allah ordains something on the Heaven the angels
beat with their wings in obedience to His Statement which sounds like that
of a chain dragged over a rock. His Statement: "Until when the fear is
banished from their hearts, the Angels say, 'What was it that your Lord said?'
'They reply, '(He has said) the Truth. And He is the Most High, The Great. "
(34.23)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 574:
Narrated Abu Huraira :
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah never listens to anything as He listens to the
Prophet reciting Quran in a pleasant sweet sounding voice." A companion of
Abu Huraira said, "He means, reciting the Quran aloud."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 575:
Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said, "Allah will say (on the Day of Resurrection), 'O Adam!'
Adam will reply, 'Labbaik wa Sa'daik! ' Then a loud Voice will be heard
(Saying) 'Allah Commands you to take out the mission of the Hell Fire from
your offspring.' "
Volume 9, Book 93, Number 576:
Narrated 'Aisha:
I never felt so jealous of any woman as I felt of Khadija, for Allah ordered
him (the Prophet ) to give Khadija the glad tidings of a palace in Paradise
(for her).

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 577:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "If Allah loves a person, He calls Gabriel, saying, 'Allah
loves so and so, O Gabriel love him' So Gabriel would love him and then
would make an announcement in the Heavens: 'Allah has loved so and-so
therefore you should love him also.' So all the dwellers of the Heavens
would love him, and then he is granted the pleasure of the people on the
earth." (See Hadith No. 66, Vol. 8)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 578:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "There are angels coming to you in succession at night,
and others during the day, and they all gather at the time of 'Asr and Fajr
prayers. Then the angels who have stayed with you overnight ascend (to the
heaven) and He (Allah) asks them though He perfectly knows their affairs.
'In what state have you left my slaves?' They say, 'When we left them, they
were praying and when we came to them they were praying.' "

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 579:
Narrated Abu Dharr:
The Prophet said, Gabriel came to me and gave me the glad tidings that
anyone who died without worshipping anything besides Allah, would enter
Paradise. I asked (Gabriel), 'Even if he committed theft, and even if he
committed illegal sexual intercourse?' He said, '(Yes), even if he committed
theft, and even if he Committed illegal sexual intercourse."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 580:
Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib:
Allah's Apostle said, "O so-and-so, whenever you go to your bed (for
sleeping) say, 'O Allah! I have surrendered myself over to you and have
turned my face towards You, and leave all my affairs to You and depend on
You and put my trust in You expecting Your reward and fearing Your
punishment. There is neither fleeing from You nor refuge but with You. I
believe in the Book (Qur'an) which You have revealed and in Your Prophet
(Muhammad) whom You have sent.' If you then die on that night, then you
will die as a Muslim, and if you wake alive in the morning then you will
receive the reward." (See Hadith No. 323, Vol. 8)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 581:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa:
Allah's Apostle said on the Day of (the battle of) the Clans, "O Allah! The
Revealer of the Holy Book, The Quick Taker of Accounts! Defeat the clans
and shake them."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 582:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
(regarding the Verse):-- 'Neither say your prayer aloud, nor say it in a low
tone.' (17.110) This Verse was revealed while Allah's Apostle was hiding
himself in Mecca, and when he raised his voice while reciting the Qur'an, the
pagans would hear him and abuse the Qur'an and its Revealer and to the
one who brought it. So Allah said:-'Neither say your prayer aloud, nor say it in a low tone.' (17.110) That is, 'Do
not say your prayer so loudly that the pagans can hear you, nor say it in such
a low tone that your companions do not hear you.' But seek a middle course
between those (extremes), i.e., let your companions hear, but do not relate
the Qur'an loudly, so that they may learn it from you.

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 583:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah said: "The son of Adam hurts Me by abusing Time,
for I am Time; in My Hands are all things and I cause the revolution of night
and day.' " (See Hadith No. 351, Vol. 6)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 584:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Allah said: The Fast is for Me and I will give the reward for
it, as he (the one who observes the fast) leaves his sexual desire, food and
drink for My Sake. Fasting is a screen (from Hell) and there are two
pleasures for a fasting person, one at the time of breaking his fast, and the
other at the time when he will meet his Lord. And the smell of the mouth of
a fasting person is better in Allah's Sight than the smell of musk." (See
Hadith No. 128, Vol. 3).

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 585:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Once while Job (Aiyub) was taking a bath in a naked
state. Suddenly a great number of gold locusts started falling upon him and
he started collecting them in his clothes. His Lord called him, 'O Job! Didn't I
make you rich enough to dispense with what you see now?' Job said, 'Yes, O
Lord! But I cannot dispense with Your Blessings

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 586:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Every night when it is the last third of the night, our
Lord, the Superior, the Blessed, descends to the nearest heaven and says: Is
there anyone to invoke Me that I may respond to his invocation? Is there
anyone to ask Me so that I may grant him his request? Is there anyone
asking My forgiveness so that I may forgive him?. " (See Hadith No. 246,Vol.
2)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 587:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "We (Muslims) are the last (to come) but will be the
foremost on the Day of Resurrection." The narrators of this Hadith said:
Allah said (to man), 'Spend (in charity), for then I will compensate you
(generously).' "

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 588:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said that Gabriel said, "Here is Khadija coming to you with a
dish of food or a tumbler containing something to drink. Convey to her a
greeting from her Lord (Allah) and give her the glad tidings that she will
have a palace in Paradise built of Qasab wherein there will be neither any
noise nor any fatigue (trouble)." (See Hadith No. 168, Vol. 5)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 589:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
the Prophet said, "Allah said, "I have prepared for My righteous slaves (such
excellent things) as no eye has ever seen, nor an ear has ever heard nor a
human heart can ever think of.' "

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 590:
Narrated Ibn Abbas:
Whenever the Prophet offered the night (Tahajjud) prayer, he used to say,
"O Allah! All the Praises are for You; You are the Light of the Heavens and
the Earth. And all the Praises are for You; You are the Keeper of the Heavens
and the Earth. All the Praises are for You; You are the Lord of the Heavens
and the Earth and whatever is therein. You are the Truth, and Your Promise
is the Truth, and Your Speech is the Truth, and meeting You is the Truth, and
Paradise is the Truth and Hell (Fire) is the Truth and all the prophets are the
Truth and the Hour is the Truth. O Allah! I surrender to You, and believe in
You, and depend upon You, and repent to You, and in Your cause I fight and
with Your orders I rule. So please forgive my past and future sins and those
sins which I did in secret or in public. It is You Whom I worship, None has the
right to be worshipped except You ." (See Hadith No. 329,Vol. 8)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 591:
Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair:
Sa'id bin Al-Musaiyab, 'Alqama bin Waqqas and 'Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah
regarding the narrating of the forged statement against 'Aisha, the wife of
the Prophet, when the slanderers said what they said and Allah revealed her
innocence. 'Aisha said, "But by Allah, I did not think that Allah, (to confirm
my innocence), would reveal Divine Inspiration which would be recited, for I
consider myself too unimportant to be talked about by Allah through Divine
Inspiration revealed for recitation, but I hoped that Allah's Apostle might
have a dream in which Allah would reveal my innocence. So Allah revealed:--
'Verily! Those who spread the slander are a gang among you...' (The ten
Verses in Surat-an-Nur) (24.11-20)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 592:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah says, "If My slave intends to do a bad deed then
(O Angels) do not write it unless he does it; if he does it, then write it as it is,
but if he refrains from doing it for My Sake, then write it as a good deed (in
his account). (On the other hand) if he intends to go a good deed, but does
not do it, then write a good deed (in his account), and if he does it, then
write it for him (in his account) as ten good deeds up to seven-hundred
times.' "

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 593:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah created the creation, and when He finished from
His creation the Rahm (womb) got up, and Allah said (to it). "Stop! What do
you want? It said; "At this place I seek refuge with You from all those who
sever me (i.e. sever the ties of Kinship.)" Allah said: "Would you be pleased
that I will keep good relation with the one who will keep good relation with
you, and I will sever the relation with the one who will sever the relation
with you. It said: 'Yes, 'O my Lord.' Allah said (to it), 'That is for you.'' And
then Abu Huraira recited the Verse:-- "Would you then if you were given the
authority, do mischief in the land, and sever your ties of kinship." (47.22)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 594:
Narrated Zaid bin Khalid:
It rained (because of the Prophet's invocation for rain) and the Prophet said,
"Allah said, 'Some of My slaves have become disbelievers in Me, and some
others, believers in Me.'"

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 595:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah said, 'If My slaves loves the meeting with Me, I
too love the meeting with him; and if he dislikes the meeting with Me, I too
dislike the meeting with him.' " (See Hadith No. 514, Vol. 8)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 596:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Allah said, 'I am to my slave as he thinks of Me, (i.e. I
am able to do for him what he thinks I can do for him). (See Hadith No. 502)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 597:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "A man who never did any good deed, said that if he
died, his family should burn him and throw half the ashes of his burnt body
in the earth and the other half in the sea, for by Allah, if Allah should get
hold of him, He would inflict such punishment on him as He would not inflict
on anybody among the people. But Allah ordered the sea to collect what
was in it (of his ashes) and similarly ordered the earth to collect what was in
it (of his ashes). Then Allah said (to the recreated man ), 'Why did you do
so?' The man replied, 'For being afraid of You, and You know it (very well).'
So Allah forgave him."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 598:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard the Prophet saying, "If somebody commits a sin and then says, 'O my
Lord! I have sinned, please forgive me!' and his Lord says, 'My slave has
known that he has a Lord who forgives sins and punishes for it, I therefore
have forgiven my slave (his sins).' Then he remains without committing any
sin for a while and then again commits another sin and says, 'O my Lord, I
have committed another sin, please forgive me,' and Allah says, 'My slave
has known that he has a Lord who forgives sins and punishes for it, I
therefore have forgiven my slave (his sin). Then he remains without
Committing any another sin for a while and then commits another sin (for
the third time) and says, 'O my Lord, I have committed another sin, please
forgive me,' and Allah says, 'My slave has known that he has a Lord Who
forgives sins and punishes for it I therefore have forgiven My slave (his sin),
he can do whatever he likes."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 599:
Narrated Abu Said:
The Prophet mentioned a man from the people of the past or those who
preceded you. The Prophet said a sentence meaning: Allah had given him
wealth and children. When his death approached, he said to his sons, "What
kind of father have I been to you?" They replied, "You have been a good
father." He told them that he had not presented any good deed before
Allah, and if Allah should get hold of him He would punish him.' "So look!"
he added, "When I die, burn me, and when I turn into coal, crush me, and
when there comes a windy day, scatter my ashes in the wind." The Prophet
added, "Then by Allah, he took a firm promise from his children to do so,
and they did so. (They burnt him after his death) and threw his ashes on a
windy day. Then Allah commanded to his ashes. "Be," and behold! He
became a man standing! Allah said, "O My slave! What made you do what
you did?" He replied, "For fear of You." Nothing saved him then but Allah's
Mercy (So Allah forgave him).
Volume 9, Book 93, Number 600:
Narrated Anas:
I heard the Prophet saying, "On the Day of Resurrection I will intercede and
say, "O my Lord! Admit into Paradise (even) those who have faith equal to a
mustard seed in their hearts." Such people will enter Paradise, and then I
will say, 'O (Allah) admit into Paradise (even) those who have the least
amount of faith in their hearts." Anas then said: As if I were just now looking
at the fingers of Allah's Apostle.

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 601:
Narrated Ma'bad bin Hilal Al'Anzi:
We, i.e., some people from Basra gathered and went to Anas bin Malik, and
we went in company with Thabit Al-Bunnani so that he might ask him about
the Hadith of Intercession on our behalf. Behold, Anas was in his palace, and
our arrival coincided with his Duha prayer. We asked permission to enter
and he admitted us while he was sitting on his bed. We said to Thabit, "Do
not ask him about anything else first but the Hadith of Intercession." He
said, "O Abu Hamza! There are your brethren from Basra coming to ask you
about the Hadith of Intercession." Anas then said, "Muhammad talked to us
saying, 'On the Day of Resurrection the people will surge with each other
like waves, and then they will come to Adam and say, 'Please intercede for
us with your Lord.' He will say, 'I am not fit for that but you'd better go to
Abraham as he is the Khalil of the Beneficent.' They will go to Abraham and
he will say, 'I am not fit for that, but you'd better go to Moses as he is the
one to whom Allah spoke directly.' So they will go to Moses and he will say,
'I am not fit for that, but you'd better go to Jesus as he is a soul created by
Allah and His Word.' (Be: And it was) they will go to Jesus and he will say, 'I
am not fit for that, but you'd better go to Muhammad.'
They would come to me and I would say, 'I am for that.' Then I will ask for
my Lord's permission, and it will be given, and then He will inspire me to
praise Him with such praises as I do not know now. So I will praise Him with
those praises and will fall down, prostrate before Him. Then it will be said, 'O
Muhammad, raise your head and speak, for you will be listened to; and ask,
for your will be granted (your request); and intercede, for your intercession
will be accepted.' I will say, 'O Lord, my followers! My followers!' And then it
will be said, 'Go and take out of Hell (Fire) all those who have faith in their
hearts, equal to the weight of a barley grain.' I will go and do so and return
to praise Him with the same praises, and fall down (prostrate) before Him.
Then it will be said, 'O Muhammad, raise your head and speak, for you will
be listened to, and ask, for you will be granted (your request); and
intercede, for your intercession will be accepted.' I will say, 'O Lord, my
followers! My followers!' It will be said, 'Go and take out of it all those who
have faith in their hearts equal to the weight of a small ant or a mustard
seed.' I will go and do so and return to praise Him with the same praises, and
fall down in prostration before Him. It will be said, 'O, Muhammad, raise
your head and speak, for you will be listened to, and ask, for you will be
granted (your request); and intercede, for your intercession will be
accepted.' I will say, 'O Lord, my followers!' Then He will say, 'Go and take
out (all those) in whose hearts there is faith even to the lightest, lightest
mustard seed. (Take them) out of the Fire.' I will go and do so."'
When we left Anas, I said to some of my companions, "Let's pass by AlHasan who is hiding himself in the house of Abi Khalifa and request him to
tell us what Anas bin Malik has told us." So we went to him and we greeted
him and he admitted us. We said to him, "O Abu Said! We came to you from
your brother Anas Bin Malik and he related to us a Hadith about the
intercession the like of which I have never heard." He said, "What is that?"
Then we told him of the Hadith and said, "He stopped at this point (of the
Hadith)." He said, "What then?" We said, "He did not add anything to that."
He said, Anas related the Hadith to me twenty years ago when he was a
young fellow. I don't know whether he forgot or if he did not like to let you
depend on what he might have said." We said, "O Abu Said ! Let us know
that." He smiled and said, "Man was created hasty. I did not mention that,
but that I wanted to inform you of it.
Anas told me the same as he told you and said that the Prophet added, 'I
then return for a fourth time and praise Him similarly and prostrate before
Him me the same as he 'O Muhammad, raise your head and speak, for you
will be listened to; and ask, for you will be granted (your request): and
intercede, for your intercession will be accepted .' I will say, 'O Lord, allow
me to intercede for whoever said, 'None has the right to be worshiped
except Allah.' Then Allah will say, 'By my Power, and my Majesty, and by My
Supremacy, and by My Greatness, I will take out of Hell (Fire) whoever said:
'None has the right to be worshipped except Allah.' ''

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 602:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
Allah's Apostle said, "The person who will be the last one to enter Paradise
and the last to come out of Hell (Fire) will be a man who will come out
crawling, and his Lord will say to him, 'Enter Paradise.' He will reply, 'O Lord,
Paradise is full.' Allah will give him the same order thrice, and each time the
man will give Him the same reply, i.e., 'Paradise is full.' Thereupon Allah will
say (to him), 'Ten times of the world is for you.' "

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 603:
Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim:
Allah's Apostle said, "There will be none among you but his Lord will talk to
him, and there will be no interpreter between him and Allah. He will look to
his right and see nothing but his deeds which he has sent forward, and will
look to his left and see nothing but his deeds which he has sent forward, and
will look in front of him and see nothing but the (Hell) Fire facing him. So
save yourself from the (Hell) Fire even with half a date (given in charity)." AlA'mash said: 'Amr bin Murra said, Khaithama narrated the same and added,
'..even with a good word.' "

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 604:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
A priest from the Jews came (to the Prophet) and said, "On the Day of
Resurrection, Allah will place all the heavens on one finger, and the Earth on
one finger, and the waters and the land on one finger, and all the creation
on one finger, and then He will shake them and say. 'I am the King! I am the
King!'" I saw the Prophet smiling till his premolar teeth became visible
expressing his amazement and his belief in what he had said. Then the
Prophet recited: 'No just estimate have they made of Allah such as due to
Him (up to)...; High is He above the partners they attribute to Him.' (39.67)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 605:
Narrated Safwan bin Muhriz:
A man asked Ibn 'Umar, "What have you heard from Allah's Apostle
regarding An-Najwa?" He said, "Everyone of you will come close to His Lord
Who will screen him from the people and say to him, 'Did you do so-and-so?'
He will reply, 'Yes.' Then Allah will say, 'Did you do so-and-so?' He will reply,
'Yes.' So Allah will question him and make him confess, and then Allah will
say, 'I screened your sins in the world and forgive them for you today.' "

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 606:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "Adam and Moses debated with each other and Moses
said, 'You are Adam who turned out your offspring from Paradise.' Adam
said, "You are Moses whom Allah chose for His Message and for His direct
talk, yet you blame me for a matter which had been ordained for me even
before my creation?' Thus Adam overcame Moses."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 607:
Narrated Anas:
Allah's Apostle said, "The believers will be assembled on the Day of
Resurrection and they will say, 'Let us look for someone to intercede for us
with our Lord so that He may relieve us from this place of ours.' So they will
go to Adam and say, 'You are Adam, the father of mankind, and Allah
created you with His Own Hands and ordered the Angels to prostrate before
you, and He taught you the names of all things; so please intercede for us
with our Lord so that He may relieve us.' Adam will say, to them, 'I am not fit
for that,' and then he will mention to them his mistake which he has
committed.' "

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 608:
Narrated Anas bin Malik:
The night Allah's Apostle was taken for a journey from the sacred mosque
(of Mecca) Al-Ka'ba: Three persons came to him (in a dreamy while he was
sleeping in the Sacred Mosque before the Divine Inspiration was revealed to
Him. One of them said, "Which of them is he?" The middle (second) angel
said, "He is the best of them." The last (third) angle said, "Take the best of
them." Only that much happened on that night and he did not see them till
they came on another night, i.e. after The Divine Inspiration was revealed to
him. (Fateh-Al-Bari Page 258, Vol. 17) and he saw them, his eyes were asleep
but his heart was not----and so is the case with the prophets: their eyes sleep
while their hearts do not sleep. So those angels did not talk to him till they
carried him and placed him beside the well of Zam-Zam. From among them
Gabriel took charge of him. Gabriel cut open (the part of his body) between
his throat and the middle of his chest (heart) and took all the material out of
his chest and abdomen and then washed it with Zam-Zam water with his
own hands till he cleansed the inside of his body, and then a gold tray
containing a gold bowl full of belief and wisdom was brought and then
Gabriel stuffed his chest and throat blood vessels with it and then closed it
(the chest). He then ascended with him to the heaven of the world and
knocked on one of its doors.
The dwellers of the Heaven asked, 'Who is it?' He said, "Gabriel." They said,
"Who is accompanying you?" He said, "Muhammad." They said, "Has he
been called?" He said, "Yes" They said, "He is welcomed." So the dwellers of
the Heaven became pleased with his arrival, and they did not know what
Allah would do to the Prophet on earth unless Allah informed them. The
Prophet met Adam over the nearest Heaven. Gabriel said to the Prophet,
"He is your father; greet him." The Prophet greeted him and Adam returned
his greeting and said, "Welcome, O my Son! O what a good son you are!"
Behold, he saw two flowing rivers, while he was in the nearest sky. He
asked, "What are these two rivers, O Gabriel?" Gabriel said, "These are the
sources of the Nile and the Euphrates."
Then Gabriel took him around that Heaven and behold, he saw another river
at the bank of which there was a palace built of pearls and emerald. He put
his hand into the river and found its mud like musk Adhfar. He asked, "What
is this, O Gabriel?" Gabriel said, "This is the Kauthar which your Lord has kept
for you." Then Gabriel ascended (with him) to the second Heaven and the
angels asked the same questions as those on the first Heaven, i.e., "Who is
it?" Gabriel replied, "Gabriel". They asked, "Who is accompanying you?" He
said, "Muhammad." They asked, "Has he been sent for?" He said, "Yes."
Then they said, "He is welcomed.'' Then he (Gabriel) ascended with the
Prophet to the third Heaven, and the angels said the same as the angels of
the first and the second Heavens had said.
Then he ascended with him to the fourth Heaven and they said the same;
and then he ascended with him to the fifth Heaven and they said the same;
and then he ascended with him to the sixth Heaven and they said the same;
then he ascended with him to the seventh Heaven and they said the same.
On each Heaven there were prophets whose names he had mentioned and
of whom I remember Idris on the second Heaven, Aaron on the fourth
Heavens another prophet whose name I don't remember, on the fifth
Heaven, Abraham on the sixth Heaven, and Moses on the seventh Heaven
because of his privilege of talking to Allah directly. Moses said (to Allah), "O
Lord! I thought that none would be raised up above me."
But Gabriel ascended with him (the Prophet) for a distance above that, the
distance of which only Allah knows, till he reached the Lote Tree (beyond
which none may pass) and then the Irresistible, the Lord of Honor and
Majesty approached and came closer till he (Gabriel) was about two bow
lengths or (even) nearer. (It is said that it was Gabriel who approached and
came closer to the Prophet. (Fate Al-Bari Page 263, 264, Vol. 17). Among the
things which Allah revealed to him then, was: "Fifty prayers were enjoined
on his followers in a day and a night."
Then the Prophet descended till he met Moses, and then Moses stopped
him and asked, "O Muhammad ! What did your Lord en join upon you?" The
Prophet replied," He enjoined upon me to perform fifty prayers in a day and
a night." Moses said, "Your followers cannot do that; Go back so that your
Lord may reduce it for you and for them." So the Prophet turned to Gabriel
as if he wanted to consult him about that issue. Gabriel told him of his
opinion, saying, "Yes, if you wish." So Gabriel ascended with him to the
Irresistible and said while he was in his place, "O Lord, please lighten our
burden as my followers cannot do that." So Allah deducted for him ten
prayers where upon he returned to Moses who stopped him again and kept
on sending him back to his Lord till the enjoined prayers were reduced to
only five prayers.
Then Moses stopped him when the prayers had been reduced to five and
said, "O Muhammad! By Allah, I tried to persuade my nation, Bani Israel to
do less than this, but they could not do it and gave it up. However, your
followers are weaker in body, heart, sight and hearing, so return to your
Lord so that He may lighten your burden."
The Prophet turned towards Gabriel for advice and Gabriel did not
disapprove of that. So he ascended with him for the fifth time. The Prophet
said, "O Lord, my followers are weak in their bodies, hearts, hearing and
constitution, so lighten our burden." On that the Irresistible said, "O
Muhammad!" the Prophet replied, "Labbaik and Sa'daik." Allah said, "The
Word that comes from Me does not change, so it will be as I enjoined on you
in the Mother of the Book." Allah added, "Every good deed will be rewarded
as ten times so it is fifty (prayers) in the Mother of the Book (in reward) but
you are to perform only five (in practice)."
The Prophet returned to Moses who asked, "What have you done?" He said,
"He has lightened our burden: He has given us for every good deed a tenfold
reward." Moses said, "By Allah! I tried to make Bani Israel observe less than
that, but they gave it up. So go back to your Lord that He may lighten your
burden further." Allah's Apostle said, "O Moses! By Allah, I feel shy of
returning too many times to my Lord." On that Gabriel said, "Descend in
Allah's Name." The Prophet then woke while he was in the Sacred Mosque
(at Mecca).

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 609:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said, "Allah will say to the people of Paradise, "O the people of
Paradise!" They will say, 'Labbaik, O our Lord, and Sa'daik, and all the good is
in Your Hands!' Allah will say, "Are you satisfied?' They will say, 'Why
shouldn't we be satisfied, O our Lord as You have given us what You have
not given to any of Your created beings?' He will say, 'Shall I not give you
something better than that?' They will say, 'O our Lord! What else could be
better than that?' He will say, 'I bestow My Pleasure on you and will never be
angry with you after that.' "

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 610:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Once the Prophet was preaching while a bedouin was sitting there. The
Prophet said, "A man from among the people of Paradise will request Allah
to allow him to cultivate the land Allah will say to him, 'Haven't you got
whatever you desire?' He will reply, 'yes, but I like to cultivate the land (Allah
will permit him and) he will sow the seeds, and within seconds the plants
will grow and ripen and (the yield) will be harvested and piled in heaps like
mountains. On that Allah will say (to him), "Take, here you are, O son of
Adam, for nothing satisfies you.' "On that the bedouin said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Such man must be either from Quraish or from Ansar, for they are
farmers while we are not." On that Allah's Apostle smiled .
Volume 9, Book 93, Number 611:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
I asked Allah's Apostle "What is the biggest sin in the sight of Allah?" He
said, "To set up rivals unto Allah though He alone created you." I said, "In
fact, that is a tremendous sin," and added, "What next?" He said, "To kill
your son being afraid that he may share your food with you." I further asked,
"What next?" He said, "To commit illegal sexual intercourse with the wife of
your neighbor."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 612:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
Two person of Bani Thaqif and one from Quarish (or two persons from
Quraish and one from Bani Thaqif) who had fat bellies but little wisdom, met
near the Ka'ba. One of them said, "Did you see that Allah hears what we say?
" The other said, "He hears us if we speak aloud, but He does not hear if we
speak in stealthy quietness (softly)." The third fellow said, "If He hears when
we speak aloud, then He surely hears us if we speak in stealthy quietness
(softly)." So Allah revealed the Verse:-'And you have not been screening against yourselves, lest your ears, and
your eyes and your skins should testify against you..." (41.22)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 613:
Narrated 'Ikrima:
Ibn 'Abbas said, "How can you ask the people of the Scriptures about their
Books while you have Allah's Book (the Qur'an) which is the most recent of
the Books revealed by Allah, and you read it in its pure undistorted form?"

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 614:
Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah:
'Abdullah bin 'Abbas said, "O the group of Muslims! How can you ask the
people of the Scriptures about anything while your Book which Allah has
revealed to your Prophet contains the most recent news from Allah and is
pure and not distorted? Allah has told you that the people of the Scriptures
have changed some of Allah's Books and distorted it and wrote something
with their own hands and said, 'This is from Allah, so as to have a minor gain
for it. Won't the knowledge that has come to you stop you from asking
them? No, by Allah, we have never seen a man from them asking you about
that (the Book Al-Qur'an ) which has been revealed to you.

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 615:
Narrated Musa bin Abi 'Aisha:
Sa'id bin Jubair reported from Ibn 'Abbas (regarding the explanation of the
Verse: 'Do not move your tongue concerning (the Qur'an) to make haste
therewith) . He said, "The Prophet used to undergo great difficulty in
receiving the Divine Inspiration and used to move his lips.' Ibn 'Abbas said
(to Sa'id), "I move them (my lips) as Allah's Apostle used to move his lips."
And Said said (to me), "I move my lips as I saw Ibn 'Abbas moving his lips,"
and then he moved his lips. So Allah revealed:-'(O Muhammad!) Do not move your tongue concerning (the Qur'an) to
make haste therewith. It is for Us to collect it and give you (O Muhammad)
the ability to recite it. (i.e., to collect it in your chest and then you recite it).'
(75.16-17) But when We have recited it, to you (O Muhammad through
Gabriel) then follow you its recital.' (75.18) This means, "You should listen to
it and keep quiet and then it is upon Us to make you recite it."
The narrator added, "So Allah's Apostle used to listen whenever Gabriel
came to him, and when Gabriel left, the Prophet would recite the Qur'an as
Gabriel had recited it to him."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 616:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
regarding the explanation of the Verse:-- '(O Muhammad!) Neither say your
prayer aloud, nor say it in a low tone.' (17.110) This Verse was revealed while
Allah's Apostle was hiding himself at Mecca. At that time, when he led his
companions in prayer, he used to raise his voice while reciting the Qur'an;
and if the pagans heard him, they would abuse the Qur'an, its Revealer, and
the one who brought it. So Allah said to His Prophet: "Neither say your
prayer aloud. i.e., your recitation (of Qur'an) lest the pagans should hear (it)
and abuse the Quran" nor say it in a low tone, "lest your voice should fail to
reach your companions, "but follow a way between." (17.110)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 617:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Verse:-- '(O Muhammad!) Neither say your prayer aloud nor say it in a
low tone.' (17.110) was revealed in connection with the invocations.

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 618:
Narrated Abu Salama:
Abu Huraira said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'Whoever does not recite Qur'an in a
nice voice is not from us,' and others said extra," (that means) to recite it
aloud."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 619:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Allah's Apostle said, "Not to wish to be the like of except the like of two
men: a man whom Allah has given the Qur'an and he recites it during the
hours of the night and the hours of the day, in which case one may say, "If I
were given the same as this man has been given, I would do the same as he
is doing.' The other is a man whom Allah has given wealth and he spends it
in the right way, in which case one may say, 'If I were given the same as he
has been given, I would do the same as he is doing."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 620:
Narrated Salim's father:
The Prophet said, "Not to wish to be the like of except the like of two
(persons): a man whom Allah has given the knowledge of the Quran and he
recites it during the hours of the night and the hours of the day; and a man
whom Allah has given wealth and he spends it (in Allah's Cause) during the
hours of the night and during the hours of the day."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 621:
Narrated Al-Mughira:
Our Prophet has informed us our Lord's Message that whoever of us is
martyred, will go to Paradise.

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 622:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Whoever tells you that the Prophet concealed something of the Divine
Inspiration, do not believe him, for Allah said: 'O Apostle Muhammad!
Proclaim (the Message) which has been sent down to you from your Lord,
and if you do it not, then you have not conveyed His Message.' (5.67)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 623:
Narrated 'Abdullah:
A man said, "O Allah's Apostle! Which sin is the biggest in Allah's Sight?" The
Prophet said, "To set up rivals unto Allah though He Alone created you."
That man said, "What is next?" The Prophet said, "To kill your son lest he
should share your food with you.'' The man said, "What is next?" The
Prophet said, "To commit illegal sexual intercourse with the wife of your
neighbor." Then Allah revealed in confirmation of that: "And those who
invoke not with Allah any other god, nor kill such life as Allah has made
sacred except for just cause, nor commit illegal sexual intercourse and
whoever does this shall receive the punishment..... (25.68)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 624:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
Allah's Apostle said, "Your stay (in this world) in comparison to the stay of
the nations preceding you, is like the period between 'Asr prayer and the
sun set (in comparison to a whole day). The people of the Torah were given
the Torah and they acted on it till midday and then they were unable to carry
on. And they were given (a reward equal to) one Qirat each. Then the
people of the Gospel were given the Gospel and they acted on it till 'Asr
Prayer and then they were unable to carry on, so they were given la reward
equal to) one Qirat each. Then you were given the Qur'an and you acted on
it till sunset, therefore you were given (a reward equal to) two Qirats each.
On that, the people of the Scriptures said, 'These people (Muslims) did less
work than we but they took a bigger reward.' Allah said (to them). 'Have I
done any oppression to you as regards your rights?' They said, "No." Then
Allah said, 'That is My Blessing which I grant to whomsoever I will.' "

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 625:
Narrated Ibn Mas'ud:
A man asked the Prophet "What deeds are the best?" The Prophet said: (1)
To perform the (daily compulsory) prayers at their (early) stated fixed times,
(2) To be good and dutiful to one's own parents. (3) and to participate in
Jihad in Allah's Cause."
Volume 9, Book 93, Number 626:
Narrated Al-Hasan:
'Amr bin Taghlib said, "Some property was given to the Prophet and he gave
it to some people and withheld it from some others. Then he came to know
that they (the latter) were dissatisfied. So the Prophet said, 'I give to one
man and leave (do not give) another, and the one to whom I do not give is
dearer to me than the one to whom I give. I give to some people because of
the impatience and discontent present in their hearts, and leave other
people because of the content and goodness Allah has bestowed on them,
and one of them is 'Amr bin Taghlib." 'Amr bin Taghlib said, "The sentence
which Allah's Apostle said in my favor is dearer to me than the possession of
nice red camels."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 627:
Narrated Anas:
The Prophet said, "My Lord says, 'If My slave comes nearer to me for a span,
I go nearer to him for a cubit; and if he comes nearer to Me for a cubit, I go
nearer to him for the span of outstretched arms; and if he comes to Me
walking, I go to him running.' "

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 628:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
Perhaps the Prophet mentioned the following (as Allah's Saying): "If My
slave comes nearer to Me for a span, I go nearer to him for a cubit; and if he
comes nearer to Me for a cubit; I go nearer to him for the span of
outstretched arms. (See Hadith No. 502)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 629:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said that your Lord said, "Every (sinful) deed can be expiated;
and the fast is for Me, so I will give the reward for it; and the smell which
comes out of the mouth of a fasting person, is better in Allah's Sight than
the smell of musk." (See Hadith No. 584)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 630:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet said that his Lord said: "It does not befit a slave that he should
say that he is better than Jonah (Yunus) bin Matta.

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 631:
Narrated Shu'ba:
Mu'awiya bin Qurra reported that 'Abdullah bin Al-Maghaffal Al-Muzani said,
"I saw Allah's Apostle on the day of the Conquest of Mecca, riding his shecamel and reciting Surat-al-Fath (48) or part of Surat-al-Fath. He recited it in
a vibrating and pleasant voice. Then Mu'awiya recited as 'Abdullah bin
Mughaffal had done and said, "Were I not afraid that the people would
crowd around me, I would surely recite in a vibrating pleasant voice as Ibn
Mughaffal did, imitating the Prophet." I asked Muawiya, "How did he recite
in that tone?" He said thrice, "A, A , A."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 632:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The people of the Scripture used to read the Torah in Hebrew and explain it
to the Muslims in Arabic. Then Allah's Apostle said, "Do not believe the
people of the Scripture, and do not disbelieve them, but say, 'We believe in
Allah and whatever has been revealed...' (3.84)
Volume 9, Book 93, Number 633:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
A Jew and Jewess were brought to the Prophet on a charge of committing
an illegal sexual intercourse. The Prophet asked the Jews, "What do you
(usually) do with them?" They said, "We blacken their faces and disgrace
them." He said, "Bring here the Torah and recite it, if you are truthful." They
(fetched it and) came and asked a one-eyed man to recite. He went on
reciting till he reached a portion on which he put his hand. The Prophet said,
"Lift up your hand!" He lifted his hand up and behold, there appeared the
verse of Ar-Rajm (stoning of the adulterers to death). Then he said, "O
Muhammad! They should be stoned to death but we conceal this Divine Law
among ourselves." Then the Prophet ordered that the two sinners be
stoned to death and, and they were stoned to death, and I saw the man
protecting the woman from the stones. (See Hadith No. 809, Vol. 8)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 634:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
that he heard the Prophet saying, "Allah does not listen to anything as He
listens to the recitation of the Quran by a Prophet who recites it in attractive
audible sweet sounding voice."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 635:
Narrated 'Aisha:
(when the slanderers said what they said about her): I went to my bed
knowing at that time that I was innocent and that Allah would reveal my
innocence, but by Allah, I never thought that Allah would reveal in my favor
a revelation which would be recited, for I considered myself too
unimportant to be talked about by Allah in the Divine Revelation that was to
be recited. So Allah revealed the ten Verses (of Surat-an-Nur). 'Those who
brought a false charge........' (24.11-20)
Volume 9, Book 93, Number 636:
Narrated Al-Bara':
I heard the Prophet reciting Surat at-Tin waz Zaitun (By the Fig and the
Olive) in the 'Isha' prayer and I have never heard anybody with a better
voice or recitation than his.

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 637:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The Prophet was hiding himself in Mecca and used to recite the (Qur'an) in a
loud voice. When the pagans heard him they would abuse the Qur'an and
the one who brought it, so Allah said to His Prophet: 'Neither say your
prayer aloud, nor say it in a low tone.' (17.110)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 638:
Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abdur-Rahman:
that Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri said to him, "I see that you like sheep and the
desert, so when you are looking after your sheep or when you are in the
desert and want to pronounce the Adhan, raise your voice, for no Jinn,
human being or any other things hear the Mu'adh-dhin's voice but will be a
witness for him on the Day of Resurrection." Abu Sa'id added, "I heard this
from Allah's Apostle."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 639:
Narrated 'Aisha:
The Prophet used to recite the Quran with his head in my lap while I used to
be in my periods (having menses).
Volume 9, Book 93, Number 640:
Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:
I heard Hisham bin Hakim reciting Surat-al-Furqan during the lifetime of
Allah's Apostle, I listened to his recitation and noticed that he was reciting in
a way that Allah's Apostle had not taught me. I was about to jump over him
while He was still in prayer, but I waited patiently and when he finished his
prayer, I put my sheet round his neck (and pulled him) and said, "Who has
taught you this Sura which I have heard you reciting?" Hisham said, "Allah's
Apostle taught it to me." I said, "You are telling a lie, for he taught it to me in
a way different from the way you have recited it!" Then I started leading
(dragged) him to Allah's Apostle and said (to the Prophet), " I have heard
this man reciting Surat-al-Furqan in a way that you have not taught me." The
Prophet said: "(O 'Umar) release him! Recite, O Hisham." Hisham recited in
the way I heard him reciting. Allah's Apostle said, "It was revealed like this."
Then Allah's Apostle said, "Recite, O 'Umar!" I recited in the way he had
taught me, whereupon he said, "It was revealed like this," and added, "The
Quran has been revealed to be recited in seven different ways, so recite of it
whichever is easy for you ." (See Hadith No. 514, Vol. 6)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 641:
Narrated 'Imran:
I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Why should a doer (people) try to do good deeds?'
The Prophet said, "Everybody will find easy to do such deeds as will lead him
to his destined place for which he has been created.'

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 642:
Narrated 'Ali:
While the Prophet was in a funeral procession, he took a stick and started
scraping the earth with it and said, "There is none of you but has his place
assigned either in Hell or in Paradise." They (the people) said, "Shall we not
depend upon that (and give up doing any deeds)?' He said, " Carry on doing
(good deeds) for everybody will find it easy to do such deeds as will lead him
to his destined place for which he has been created ." (And then the
Prophet recited the Verse):-- 'As for him who gives (in charity) and keeps his
duty to Allah...' (92.5)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 643:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Before Allah created the creations, He wrote
a Book (wherein He has written): My Mercy has preceded my Anger." and
that (Book) is written with Him over the Throne."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 644:
Narrated Zahdam:
There were good relations and brotherhood between this tribe of Jurm and
the Ash'ariyyin. Once, while we were sitting with Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari, there
was brought to him a meal which contained chicken meat, and there was
sitting beside him, a man from the tribe of Bani Taimul-lah who looked like
one of the Mawali. Abu Musa invited the man to eat but the man said, "I
have seen chicken eating some dirty things, and I have taken an oath not to
eat chicken." Abu Musa said to him, "Come along, let me tell you something
in this regard. Once I went to the Prophet with a few men from Ash'ariyyin
and we asked him for mounts. The Prophet said, By Allah, I will not mount
you on anything; besides I do not have anything to mount you on.' Then a
few camels from the war booty were brought to the Prophet, and he asked
about us, saying, 'Where are the group of Ash'ariyyin?' So he ordered for
five fat camels to be given to us and then we set out. We said, 'What have
we done? Allah's Apostle took an oath that he would not give us anything to
ride and that he had nothing for us to ride, yet he provided us with mounts.
We made Allah's Apostle forget his oath! By Allah, we will never be
successful.' So we returned to him and reminded him of his oath. He said, 'I
have not provided you with the mount, but Allah has done so. By Allah, I
may take an oath to do something, but on finding something else which is
better, I do that which is better and make the expiation for my oath.' "

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 645:
Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:
The delegates of 'Abdul Qais came to Allah's Apostle and said, "The pagans
of the tribe of Mudar intervene between you and us therefore we cannot
come to you except in the Holy months. So please order us to do something
good (Religious deeds) by which we may enter Paradise (by acting on them)
and we may inform our people whom we have left behind to observe it."
The Prophet said, "I order you to do four things and forbid you from four
things: I order you to believe in Allah. Do you know what is meant by belief
in Allah? It is to testify that none has the right to be worshipped except
Allah, to offer prayers perfectly, to give Zakat, and to give Al-Khumus (onefifth of the war booty) (in Allah's Cause). And I forbid you four things, (i.e.,
Do not drink alcoholic drinks) Ad-Dubba, An-Naqir, (pitched water skins), AzZuruf, Al-Muzaffat and Al--Hantam (names of utensils used for the
preparation of alcoholic drinks)." (See Hadith No. 50, Vol. 1)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 646:
Narrated Aisha:
Allah's Apostle said, "The painter of these pictures will be punished on the
Day of Resurrection, and it will be said to them, Make alive what you have
created.' "

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 647:
Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
The Prophet said, "The painters of these pictures will be punished on the
Day of Resurrection, and it will be said to them, 'Make alive what you have
created."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 648:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
I heard the Prophet saying, "Allah said, 'Who are most unjust than those
who try to create something like My creation? I challenge them to create
even a smallest ant, a wheat grain or a barley grain.' "

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 649:
Narrated Abu Musa:
The Prophet said, 'The example of a believer who recites the Qur'an is that
of a citron (a citrus fruit) which is good in taste and good in smell. And the
believer who does not recite the Quran is like a date which has a good taste
but no smell. And the example of an impious person who recites the Qur'an
is that of Ar-Rihana (an aromatic plant) which smells good but is bitter in
taste. And the example of an impious person who does not recite the Quran
is that of a colocynth which is bitter in taste and has no smell."

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 650:
Narrated 'Aisha:
Some people asked the Prophet regarding the soothsayers. He said, "They
are nothing." They said, "O Allah's Apostle! Some of their talks come true."
The Prophet said, "That word which happens to be true is what a Jinn
snatches away by stealth (from the Heaven) and pours it in the ears of his
friend (the foreteller) with a sound like the cackling of a hen. The
soothsayers then mix with that word, one hundred lies."
Volume 9, Book 93, Number 651:
Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
The Prophet said, "There will emerge from the East some people who will
recite the Qur'an but it will not exceed their throats and who will go out of
(renounce) the religion (Islam) as an arrow passes through the game, and
they will never come back to it unless the arrow, comes back to the middle
of the bow (by itself) (i.e., impossible). The people asked, "What will their
signs be?" He said, "Their sign will be the habit of shaving (of their beards).
(Fateh Al-Bari, Page 322, Vol. 17th)

Volume 9, Book 93, Number 652:
Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet said, "(There are) two words which are dear to the Beneficent
(Allah) and very light (easy) for the tongue (to say), but very heavy in weight
in the balance. They are: 'Subhan Allah wa-bi hamdihi' and 'Subhan Allah Al'Azim." (See Hadith No. 673, Vol. 8).
