Chapter 1: Ravana Asking for Instruction

Om! Homage to the Triple Treasure! Homage to all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas!
Thus have I heard. The Bhagavan once stayed in the Castle of Lanka, which is situated on
the peak of Mount Malaya on the great ocean, and which is adorned with flowers made of
jewels of various kinds. He was with a large assembly of Bhikshus(monks) and with a
great multitude of Bodhisattvas, who had come together from various Buddha-lands. The
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas, headed by the Bodhisattva Maha-mati(Great Wisdom), were
all perfect masters of the various Samadhis, the [tenfold] self-mastery, the [ten] powers,
and the [six] psychic faculties; they were anointed by the hands of all the Buddhas; they
all well understood the significance of the objective world as the manifestation of their
own Heart; they knew how to maintain [various] forms, teachings, and disciplinary
measures, according to the various mentalities and behaviours of beings; they were
thoroughly versed in the five Dharmas, the [three] Svabhavas, the [eight]
Vijnanas(consciousness), and the twofold non-Self.
At that time, the Bhagavan, who had been preaching in the palace of the Great Oceanic
Dragon King, came out at the expiration of seven days and was greeted by an
innumerable host of heavenly beings including Sakra, Brahma, and dragon kings.
Looking at Lanka on Mount Malaya, the Bhagavan smiled and said, "By the Tathagatas
of the past, who were Arhats and Fully-Enlightened Ones, this Truth was made the
subject of their discourse, at that castle of Lanka on the mountain-peak of Malaya, -- the
Truth realizable by noble wisdom in one's inmost self, which is beyond the reasoning
knowledge of the philosophers as well as the state of consciousness of the
Sravakas(Voice-hearers) and Pratyekabuddhas(Conditional-Awakeners). I, too, would
now for the sake of Ravana, Overlord of the Yakshas, discourse on this Truth."
[Inspired] by the sacrosanct power of the Tathagata, Ravana, Lord of the Rakshasas,
heard the Buddha's voice. Indeed, the Bhagavan, surrounded and accompanied by an innumerable host of Sakra, Brahma, Guardian Gods, and heavenly dragons, came out of the
palace of the Great Oceanic Dragon King; and looking at the waves of the ocean and also
at the mental agitations going on in those assembled, [he thought of] the ocean of the
Alaya-consciousness (Alaya-vijnana) where the evolving Vijanas [like the waves] are
stirred by the wind of objectivity. While he was standing there [thus absorbed in
contemplation, Ravana saw him and] uttered a joyous cry, saying: "I will go and request
of the Buddha to enter into Lanka; for the long night [of transmigrations) he would
probably profit, do good, and gladden the gods as well as human beings."

Thereupon, Ravana, Lord of the Rakshasas, with his attendants, riding in his floral
celestial chariot, came up where the Buddha was, and having arrived there he and his
attendants came out of the chariot. Walking around the Buddha three times from left to
right, they played on a musical instrument, beating it with a stick of blue Indra (saphire),
and hanging the lute at one side, which was inlaid with the choicest lapis lazuli and
supported by [a ribbon of] priceless cloth, yellowish-white like jewels, they sang with
various notes such as Saharshya, Rishabha, Gandhara, Dhaivata, Nishada. Madyama, and
Kaisika, which were melodiously modulated in Grama, Murchana, etc.; the voice in
accompaniment with the flute beautifully blended with the measure of the Gatha (verses):
"The truth-treasure whose principle is the self-nature of Mind, has no selfhood
(nairatmyam), stands above all reasoning, and is free from impurities; it points to the
knowledge attained in one's inmost self; Lord, show me here the way leading to the
Truth.
2. "The Sugata is the body in whom are stored immaculate virtues; in him are manifested
[bodies] trans-forming and transformed; he enjoys the Truth realised in his inmost self;
may he visit Lanka. Now is the time, Muni!
3. "This Lanka was inhabited by the Buddhas of the past, and [they were] accompanied
by their sons who were owners of many forms. Lord, show me now the highest Truth,
and the Yakshas who are endowed with many forms will listen.¡±
Thereupon, Ravana, the Lord of Lanka, further adapting the Totaka rhythm sang this in
the measure of the Gatha.
4. After seven nights, the Bhagavan leaving the ocean which is the abode of the Makara,
the palace of the sea-king, now stands on the shore.
5. Just as the Buddha rises, Ravana, accompanied by the Apsaras and Yakshas numerous,
by Suka, Sarana, and learned men,
6. Miraculously goes over to the place where the Lord is standing. Alighting from the
floral vehicle, he greets the Tathagata reverentially, makes him offerings, tells him who
he is, and stands by the Lord.
7. "I who have come here, am called Ravana, the ten-headed king of the Rakshasas,
mayest thou graciously receive me with Lanka and all its residents.
8. "In this city, the inmost state of consciousness realised, indeed, by the Enlightened
Ones of the past was disclosed on this peak studded with precious stones.
9. "Let the Bhagavan, too. surrounded by sons of the Victorious One, now disclose the
Truth immaculate on this peak embellished with precious stones; we, together with the
residents of Lanka, desire to listen.

10. "The Lankavatara Sutra which is praised by the Buddhas of the past [discloses] the
inmost state of consciousness realized by them, which is not founded on any system of
doctrine.
11. "I recollect the Buddhas of the past surrounded by sons of the Victorious One recite
this Sutra; the Bhagavan, too, will speak.
12. "In the time to come, there will be Buddhas and Buddha-Sons pitying the Yakshas;
the Leaders will discourse on this magnificent doctrine on the peak adorned with precious
stones.
13. "This magnificent city of Lanka is adorned with varieties of precious stones,
[surrounded] by peaks, refreshing and beautiful and canopied by a net of jewels.
14. "Bhagavan, here are the Yakshas who are free from faults of greed, reflecting on [the
Truth] realized in one's inmost self and making offerings to the Buddhas of the past; they
are believers in the teaching of the Mahayana and intent on disciplining one another.
15. "There are younger Yakshas, girls and boys, desiring to know the Mahayana. Come,
Bhagavan, who art our Teacher, come to Lanka on Mount Malaya.
16. "The Rakshasas, with Kumbhakara at their head, who are residing in the city, wish, as
they are devoted to the Mahayana, to hear about this inmost realization.
17. "They have made offerings assiduously to the Buddhas in the past and are to-day
going to do the same. Come, for compassion's sake, to the Lanka, together with [thy]
sons.
18. "Mahamati, accept my mansion, the company of the Apsaras, necklaces of various
sorts, and the delightful Asoka garden.
19. "I give myself up to serve the Buddhas and their sons; there is nothing with me that I
do not give up [for their sake]; Great Muni, have compassion on me!¡±
20. Hearing him speak thus, the Lord of the Triple World said, "King of Yakshas, this
mountain of precious stones was visited by the Leaders in the past.
21. "And, taking pity on you, they discoursed on the Truth revealed in their inmost
[consciousness]. [The Buddhas of] the future time will proclaim [the same] on this jeweladorned mountain.
22. "This [inmost Truth] is the abode of those Yogins who stand in the presence of the
Truth. King of the Yakshas, you have the compassion of the Sugatas and myself."
23. The Bhagavan accepting the request [of the King] remained silent and undisturbed; he
now mounted the floral chariot offered by Ravana.

24. Thus Ravana and others, wise sons of the Victorious One, honoured by the Apsaras
singing and dancing, reached the city.
25. Arriving in the delightful city [the Buddha was] again the recipient of honours; he
was honoured by the group of Yakshas including Ravana and by the Yaksha women.
26. A net of jewels was offered to the Buddha by the younger Yakshas, girls and boys,
and necklaces beautifully ornamented with jewels were placed by Ravana about the neck
of the Buddha and those of the sons of the Buddha.
27. The Buddhas together with the sons of the Buddha and the wise men, accepting the
offerings, discoursed on the Truth which is the state of consciousness realised in the
inmost self.
28. Honouring [him as] the best speaker, Ravana and the company of the Yakshas
honoured Mahamati and requested of him again and again:1
29. "Thou art the asker of the Buddha concerning the state of consciousness realized in
their inmost selves, of which we here, Yakshas as well as the sons of the Buddha, are
desirous of hearing. I, together with the Yakshas, the sons of the Buddha, and the wise
men, request this of thee.
30. "Thou art the most eloquent of speakers, and the most strenuous of the Yogins; with
faith I beg of thee. Ask [the Buddha] about the doctrine, O thou the proficient one!
31. "Free from the faults of the philosophers and Pratyeka-buddhas and Sravakas is the
Truth of the inmost consciousness, immaculate and culminating in the stage of
Buddhahood."
32. Thereupon the Bhagavan created jewel-adorned mountains and other objects
magnificently embellished with jewels in an immense number.
33. On the summit of each mountain the Buddha himself was visible, and Ravana, the
Yaksha, also was found standing there.
34. Thus the entire assembly was seen on each mountain-peak, and all the countries Were
there, and in each there was a Leader.
35. Here also was the King of the Rakshasas and the residents of Lanka, and the Lanka
created by the Buddha rivaling [the real one].
36. Other things were there, too, -- the Asoka with its shining woods, and on each
mountain-peak Mahamati was making a request of the Buddha,

37. Who discoursed for the sake of the Yakshas on the Truth leading to the inmost
realization; on the mountain-peak he delivered a complete sutra with an exquisite voice
varied in hundreds of thousands of ways.
38. [After this] the teacher and the sons of the Buddha vanished away in the air, leaving
Ravana the Yaksha himself standing [above] in his mansion.
39. Thought he, "How is this? What means this? and by whom was it heard? What was it
that was seen? and by whom was it seen? Where is the city? and where is the Buddha?
40. "Where are those countries, those jewel-shining Buddhas, those Sugatas? Is it a
dream then? or a vision? or is it a castle conjured up by the Gandharvas?
41. "Or is it dust in the eye, or a fata morgana, or the dream-child of a barren woman, or
the smoke of a fire-wheel, that which I saw here?¡±
42. Then [Ravana reflected], "This is the nature as it is (dharmata) of all things, which
belongs to the realm of Mind, and it is not comprehended by the ignorant as they are
confused by every form of imagination.
43. "There is neither the seer nor the seen, neither the speaker nor the spoken; the form
and usage of the Buddha and his Dharma -- they are nothing but discrimination.
44. "Those who see things such as were seen before, do not see the Buddha; [even] when
discrimination is not aroused, one does not see1 the Buddha; the Buddha being fullyenlightened is seen where the world itself is not evolved.
The Lord of Lanka was then immediately awakened [from his reflection], feeling a
revulsion (paravriti) in his Heart and realizing that the world was nothing but his own
Heart: he was settled in the realm of non-discrimination, was urged by the stock of his
past good deeds, acquired the cleverness of understanding all the texts, obtained the
faculty of seeing things as they are, was no more dependent upon others, observed things
excellently with his own wisdom (buddhi), gained the insight that was not of discursive
reasoning, was no more dependent upon others, became a great Yogin of the discipline,
was able to manifest himself in all excellent forms, got thoroughly acquainted with all
skilful means, had the knowledge of the characteristic aspects of every stage, by which he
would surmount it skillfully, was delighted to look into3 the self-nature of Citta, Manas,
Manovijnana, got a view whereby he could cut himself loose from the triple continuation,
had the knowledge of disposing of every argument of the philosophers on causation,
thoroughly understood the Tathagata-garbha, the stage of Buddhahood, the inmost self,
found himself abiding in the Buddha-knowledge; [when suddenly] a voice was heard
from the sky, saying, "It is to be known by oneself.¡±
"Well done, well done, Lord of Lanka! Well done, indeed, Lord of Lanka, for once more!
The Yogin is to discipline himself as thou doest. The Tathagatas and all things are to be
viewed as they are viewed by thee; otherwise viewed, it is nihilism. All things are to be

comprehended by transcending the Citta, Manas, and Vijnana as is done by thee. Thou
shouldst look inwardly and not become attached to the letter and a superficial view of
things; thou shouldst not fall into the attainments, conceptions, experiences, views, and
Samadhis of the Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers; thou shouldst not have
any liking for small talk and witticism; thou shouldst not cherish the notion of selfsubstance, nor have any thought for the vainglory of rulership, nor dwell on such
Dhyanas as belong to the six Dhyanas, etc.
"Lord of Lanka, this is the realization of the great Yogins: to destroy the discourses
advanced by others, to crush mischievous views in pieces, to keep themselves properly
away from ego-centered notions, to cause a revulsion in the depths of the mind fittingly
by means of an exquisite knowledge. Such are sons of the Buddha who walk in the way
of the Mahayana. In order to enter upon the stage of self-realisation as attained by the
Tathagatas, the discipline is to be pursued by thee.
"Lord of Lanka, conducting thyself in this manner, let thee be further purified in the way
thou hast attained; by disciplining thyself well in Samadhi and Samapatti, follow not the
state realised and enjoyed by the Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers, which
rises from the imagination of those who discipline themselves according to the practices
of the puerile philosophers. They cling to the individual forms of the world created by
their egotistical ideas; they maintain such notions as element, quality, and substance; they
cling tenaciously to views originating from ignorance; they become confused by
cherishing the idea of birth where prevails emptiness; they cling to discrimination [as
real]; they fall into the way of thinking where obtains [the dualism of] qualifying and
qualified.
"Lord of Lanka, this is what leads to various excellent attainments, this is what makes
one grow aware of the inmost attainment, this is the Mahayana realisation. This will
result in the acquirement of an excellent condition of existence.
"Lord of Lanka, by entering upon the Mahayana discipline the veils [of ignorance] are
destroyed, and one turns away from the multitudinous waves of the Vijnana and falls not
into the refuge and practice of the philosophers.
"Lord of Lanka, the philosophers' practice starts from their own egotistic attachments.
Their ugly practice arises from adhering to dualistic views concerning the self-nature of
the Vijnana.
"Well done, Lord of Lanka; reflect on the signification of this as you did when seeing the
Tathagata before; for this, indeed, is seeing the Tathagata."
At that time it occurred to Ravana: "I wish to see the Bhagavan again, who has all the
disciplinary practices at his command, who has turned away from the practices of the
philosophers, who is born of the state of realizations in the inmost consciousness, and
who is beyond [the dualism of] the transformed and the transforming. He is the
knowledge realized by the Yogins, he is the realization attained by those who enjoy the

perfect bliss of the Samadhi which they gain by coming to an intuitive understanding
through meditation. May I see thus [again] the Compassionate One by means of his
miraculous powers in whom the fuel of passion and discrimination is destroyed, who is
surrounded by sons of the Buddha, who has penetrated into the minds and thoughts of all
beings, who moves about everywhere, who knows everything, who keeps himself away
from work (kriya) and form (lakshana); seeing him may I attain what I have not yet
attained, [retain] what I have already gained, may I conduct myself with nondiscrimination, abide in the joy of Samadhi and Samapatti, and attain the ground where
the Tathagatas walk, and in these make progress."
At that moment, the Bhagavan recognizing that the Lord of Lanka is to attain the
Anutpattika-dharma-kshanti (Uncreated-Dharma-Forbearance) showed his glorious
compassion for the ten-headed one by making himself visible once more on the
mountain-peak studded with many jewels and enveloped in a net-work of jewels. The
ten-headed King of Lanka saw the splendour again as seen before on the mountain-peak,
[he saw] the Tathagata, who was the Arhat and the Fully-Enlightened One, with the
thirty-two marks of excellence beautifully adorning his person, and also saw himself on
each mountain-peak, together with Mahamati, in front of the Tathagata, the FullyEnlightened One, putting forward his discourse on the realization experienced by the
Tathagata in his inmost self, and, surrounded by the Yakshas, conversing on the verbal
teachings and stories [of the Buddha]. Those [Buddha]-lands were seen with the
Leaders.1
Then the Bhagavan beholding again this great assembly with his wisdom-eye, which is
not the human eye, laughed loudly and most vigorously like the lion-king. Emitting rays
of light from the tuft of hair between the eyebrows, from the ribs, from the loins, from the
Srivatsa on the breast, and from every pore of the skin, ¡ªemitting rays of light which
shone flaming like the fire taking place at the end of a kalpa, like a luminous rainbow,
like the rising sun, blazing brilliantly, gloriously -- which were observed from the sky by
Sakra, Brahma, and the guardians of the world, the one who sat on the peak [of Lanka]
vying with Mount Sumeru laughed the loudest laugh. At that time the assembly of the
Bodhisattvas together with Sakra and Brahma, each thought within himself:
"For what reason, I wonder, from what cause does the Blessed One who is the master of
all the world (sarva-dharma-vasavartin), after smiling first, laugh the loudest laugh? Why
does he emit rays of light from his own body? Why, emitting [rays of light], does he
remain silent, with the realizations [of the Truth] in his inmost self, and absorbed deeply
and showing no surprise in the bliss of Samadhi, and reviewing the [ten] quarters, looking
around like the lion-king, and thinking only of the discipline, attainment, and
performance of Ravana?"
At that time, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva who was previously requested by
Ravana [to ask the Buddha concerning his self-realizations], feeling pity on him, and
knowing the minds and thoughts of the assembly of the Bodhisattvas, and observing that
beings to be born in the future would be confused in their minds because of their delight
in the verbal teaching (desanapatha), because of their clinging to the letter as [fully in

accordance with] the spirit (artha), because of their clinging to the disciplinary powers of
the Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers, -- which might lead them to think how
it were that the Tathagatas, the Bhagavans, even in their transcendental state of
consciousness should burst out into loudest laughter -- Mahamati the Bodhisattva asked
the Buddha in order to put a stop to their inquisitiveness the following question: "For
what reason, for what cause did this laughter take place?"
Said the Bhagavan: "Well done, well done, Mahamati! Well done, indeed, for once more,
Mahamati! Viewing the world as it is in itself and wishing to enlighten the people in the
world who are fallen into a wrong view of things in the past, present, and future, thou
undertakest to ask me the question. Thus should it be with the wise men who want to ask
questions for both themselves and others. Ravana, Lord of Lanka, O Mahamati, asked a
twofold question of the Tathagatas of the past who are Arhats and perfect Buddhas; and
he wishes now to ask me too a twofold question in order to have its distinction,
attainment, and scope ascertained -- this is what is never tasted by those who practice the
meditation of the Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers; and the same will be
asked by the question-loving ten-headed one of the Buddhas to come."
Knowing that, the Bhagavan said to the Lord of Lanka, thus: "Ask, thou Lord of Lanka;
the Tathagata has given thee permission [to ask], delay not, whatever questions thou
desirest to have answered, I will answer each of them with judgment to the satisfaction of
your heart. Keeping thy seat of thought free from [false] discrimination, observe well
what is to be subdued at each stage; ponder things with wisdom; [seeing into] the nature
of the inner principle in thyself, abide in the bliss of Samadhi; embraced by the Buddhas
in Samadhi, abide in the bliss of tranquillization; going beyond the Samadhi and
understanding attained by the Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas, abide in [the attainment of
the Bodhisattvas] in the stages of Acala, Sadhumati, and Dharmamegha; grasp well the
egolessness of all things in its true significance; be anointed by the Buddhas in Samadhi
at the great palace of lotus-jewels. 1Surrounded by the Bodhisattvas who are sitting on
lotuses of various sorts each supported by the gracious power of the Buddhas, thou shalt
find thyself sitting on a lotus and each one of the Bodhisattvas looking at thee face to
face. This is a realm beyond the imagination. Thou shouldst plan out an adequate plan
and establish thyself at a stage of discipline by planning out such a plan as shall include
[all kinds of] skilful means, so that thou comest to realize that realm which is beyond
imagination; and thou shouldst attain the stage of Tathagatahood in which one is able to
manifest oneself in various forms, and which is something never seen before by the
Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, philosophers, Brahma, Indra, Upendra, and others."
At that moment the Lord of Lanka being permitted by the Bhagavan, rose from his seat
on the peak of the jewel-mountain which shone like the jewel-lotus immaculate and
shining in splendour; he was surrounded by a large company of celestial maidens, and all
kinds of garlands, flowers, perfumes, incense, unguents, umbrellas, banners, fiags,
necklaces, half-necklaces, diadems, tiaras, and other ornaments whose splendour and
excellence were never heard of or seen before, were created; music was played
surpassing anything that could be had by the gods, Nagas, Yakshas, Rakshasas,
Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Mahoragas, and men; musical instruments were created equal to

anything that could be had in all the world of desire and also such superior musical
instruments were created as were to be seen in the Buddha-lands; the Bhagavan and the
Bodhisattvas were enveloped in a net of jewels; a variety of dresses and high banners was
made rising high in the air as high as seven tala trees to great [the Buddha], showering
great clouds of offerings, playing music which resounded [all around], and then
descending from the air, [the Lord of Lanka] sat down on the peak of the jewel-mountain
ornamented with magnificent jewel-lotus whose splendour was second only to the sun
and lightning. Sitting he made courtesy smiling first to the Bhagavan for his permission
and proposed him a twofold question: " It was asked of the Tathagatas of the past, who
were Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones, and it was solved by them. Bhagavan, now I ask of
thee; [the request] will certainly be complied with by thee as far as verbal instruction is
concerned1 as it was by the Buddhas [of the past]. Bhagavan, duality was discoursed
upon by the Transformed Tathagatas and Tathagatas of Trans-formation, but not by the
Tathagatas of Silence.2 The Tathagatas of Silence are absorbed in the blissful state of
Samadhi, they do not discriminate concerning this state, nor do they discourse on it.
Bhagavan, thou assuredly wilt discourse on this subject of duality. Thou art thyself a
master of all things, an Arhat, a Tathagata. The sons of the Buddha and myself are
anxious to listen to it."
The Bhagavan said, "Lord of Lanka, tell me what you mean by duality?"
The Lord of the Rakshasas, who was renewed in his ornaments, full of splendour and
beauty, with a diadem, bracelet, and necklace strung with vajra thread, said, "It is said
that even dharmas are to be abandoned, and how much more adharmas. Bhagavan, why
does this dualism exist that we are called upon to abandon? What are adharmas (nondharma)? and what are dharmas? How can there be a duality of things to abandon -- a
duality that arises from falling into discrimination, from discriminating self-substance
where there is none, from [the idea of] things created (bhautika) and uncreated, because
the non-differentiating nature of the alayavijnana is not recognized? Like the seeing of a
hair-circle as really existing in the air, [the notion of dualism] belongs to the realm of
intellection not exhaustively pur-gated. This being the. case as it should be, how could
there be any abandonment [of dharmas and adharmas]?"
Said the Bhagavan, "Lord of Lanka, seest thou not that the differentiation of things, such
as is perceived in jars and other breakable objects whose nature it is to perish in time,
takes place in a realm of discrimination [cherished by] the ignorant? This being so, is it
not to be so understood? It is due to discrimination [cherished by] the ignorant that there
exists the differentiation of dharma and adharma. Noble wisdom (aryajnana), however, is
not to be realised by seeing [things this way]. Lord of Lanka, let it be so with the ignorant
who follow the particularised aspect of existence that there are such objects as jars, etc.,
but it is not so with the wise. One flame of uniform nature rises up depending on houses,
mansions, parks, and terraces, and burns them down; while a difference in the flames is
seen according to the power of each burning material which varies in length, magnitude,
etc. This being so, why is it not to be so understood? The duality of dharma and adharma
thus comes into existence. Not only is there seen a fire-flame spreading out in one
continuity and yet showing a variety of flames, but from one seed, Lord of Lanka, are

produced, also in one continuity, stems, shoots, knots, leaves, petals, flowers, fruit,
branches, all individualized. As it is with every external object from which grows [a
variety of] objects, so also with internal objects. From ignorance there develop the
Skandhas, Dhatus, ayatanas, with all kinds of objects accompanying, which grow out in
the triple world where we have, as we see, happiness, form, speech, and behaviour, each
differentiating [infinitely]. The oneness of the Vijnana is grasped variously according to
the evolution of an objective world; thus there are seen things inferior, superior, and
middling, things defiled and free from defilement, things good and bad. Not only, Lord of
Lanka, is there such a difference of conditions in things generally, there is also seen a
variety of realisations attained innerly by each Yogin as he treads the path of discipline
which constitutes his practice. How much more difference in dharma and adharma do we
not see in a world of particulars which is evolved by discrimination? Indeed, we do.
"Lord of Lanka, the differentiation of dharma and adharma comes from discrimination.
Lord of Lanka, what are dharmas? That is, they are discriminated by the discriminations
cherished by the philosophers, Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and ignorant people. They
think that the dharmas headed by quality and substance are produced by causes¡ª[these
are the notions] to be abandoned. Such are not to be regarded [as real] because they are
appearances (lakshana). It comes from one's clinging [to appearances] that the
manifestations of his own Mind are regarded as reality (dharmata). Such things as jars,
etc., are products of discrimination conceived by the ignorant, they exist not; their
substances are not attainable. The viewing of things from this viewpoint is known as their
abandonment.
"What, then, are adharmas? Lord of Lanka, [dharmas] are unattainable as to their
selfhood, they are not appearances born of discrimination, they are above causality; there
is in them no such [dualistic] happening as is seen as reality and non-reality. This is
known as the abandoning of dharmas. What again is meant by the unattainability of
dharmas? That is, it is like horns of a hare, or an ass, or a camel, or a horse, or a child
conceived by a barren woman. They are dharmas the nature of which is unattainable; they
are not to be thought [as real] because they are appearances. They are only talked About
in popular parlance if they have any sense at all; they are not to be adhered to as in the
case of jars, etc. As these [unrealities] are to be abandoned as not comprehensible by the
mind (vijnana), so are things (bhava) of discrimination also to be abandoned. This is
called the abandoning of dharmas and adharmas. Lord of Lanka, your question as to the
way of abandoning dharmas and adharmas is hereby answered.
"Lord of Lanka, thou sayest again that thou hast asked [this question] of the Tathagatas of
the past who were Arhats and Fully-Enlightened Ones and that it was solved by them.
Lord of Lanka, that which is spoken of as the past belongs to discrimination; as the past is
thus a discriminated [idea], even so are the [ideas] of the future and the present. Because
of reality (dharmata) the Tathagatas do not discriminate, they go beyond discrimination
and futile reasoning, they do not follow the individuation-aspect of forms (r¨±pa) except
when [reality] is disclosed for the edification of the unknowing and for the sake of their
happiness.1 It is by transcendental wisdom (prajna) that the Tathagata performs deeds
transcending forms (animittacara); therefore, what constitutes the Tathagatas in essence

as well as in body is wisdom (jnana). They do not discriminate, nor are they
discriminated. Wherefore do they not discriminate the Manas? Because discrimination is
of the self, of soul, of personality. How do they not discriminate? The Manovijnana is
meant for the objective world where causality prevails as regards forms, appearances,
conditions, and figures. Therefore, discrimination and non-discrimination must be
transcended.
"Lord of Lanka, beings are appearances, they are like figures painted on the wall, they
have no sensibility [or consciousness]. Lord of Lanka, all that is in the world is devoid of
work and action because all things have no reality, and there is nothing heard, nothing
hearing. Lord of Lanka, all that is in the world is like an image magically transformed.
This is not comprehended by the philosophers and the ignorant. Lord of Lanka, he who
thus sees things, is the one who sees truthfully. Those who see things otherwise walk in
discrimination; as they depend on discrimination, they cling to dualism. It is like seeing
one's own image reflected in a mirror, or one's own shadow in the water, or in the
moonlight, or seeing one's shadow in the house, or hearing an echo in the valley. People
grasping their own shadows of discrimination uphold the discrimination of dharma and
adharma and, failing to carry out the abandonment of the dualism, they go on
discriminating and never attain tranquility, By tranquility is meant oneness (ekagra), and
oneness gives birth to the highest Samadhi, which is gained by entering into the womb of
Tathagatahood, which is the realm of noble wisdom realized in one's inmost self."
(End of Chapter 1)




Chapter 2: Collection of All the Dharmas

At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva who had visited all
the Buddha-lands, together with all the Bodhisattvas, rose from his seat
by the power of the Buddhas, drawing his upper garment over one
shoulder, placing his right knee on the ground and with folded hands,
turning in the direction of the Bhagavan, respectfully saluted him, and
praised him with the following verses:
1. As thou reviewest the world with thy transcendental knowledge and
compassion, it is to thee like an ethereal flower, of which one cannot
say whether it is born or destroyed, as [the category of] being and nonbeing is inapplicable to it.
2. As thou reviewest all things with thy transcendental knowledge and
compassion, they are to thee like visions, they are beyond the reach of
intellectual grasp, as [the category of] being and non-being is
inapplicable to them.
3. As thou reviewest the world with thy transcendental knowledge and
compassion, it is to thee always like a dream, of which one cannot say
whether it is permanent or destructible, as [the category of] being and
non-being is inapplicable to it.
4. In the Dharmakaya, whose self-nature is like a vision or a dream,
what is there to praise? When no thought arises as to existence or as to
not-having-self-nature, then there is praise.

5. Of a thing whose appearance is not visible because of its being
beyond the senses and their objects, how can it be praised or blamed,
O Muni?
6. With thy transcendental knowledge and compassion which are above
form, thou comprehendest the egolessness of things and persons, and
art thyself always clean and free from the hindrances of passion and
knowledge.
7. Thou dost not vanish in Nirvana, nor is Nirvana abiding in thee; for it
transcends the duality of knowing and known and of being and nonbeing.
8. Those who see the Muni so serene and beyond birth [and death] will
be cleansed of attachment, stainless both in this world and in the other.

At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva praising the
Bhagavan with such verses as these, made his own name known to the
Bhagavan.
9. I am Mahamati, Bhagavan, and am well versed in the Mahayana. I
wish to ask one hundred and eight questions of thee who art most
eloquent.
10. Hearing his words the Buddha, the best knower of the world,
looking over the whole assembly, spoke to the son of the Sugata thus:
11. Ask me, sons of the Victorious, and Mahamati, you ask and I will
instruct you in self-realization.
At that moment Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva who was given
by the Bhagavan the opportunity to speak, prostrated himself at the feet
of the Bhagavan and asked:
12. How can one be cleansed of false intellection? Whence does it

arise? How can one perceive errors? Whence do they arise?
13. Whence come lands, transformation, appearance, and
philosophers? Wherefore is the state of imagelessness, the gradations,
and whence are the sons of the Victorious?
14. Where is the way of emancipation? Who is in bondage? By what is
he redeemed? What is the mental state of those who practise the
Dhyanas? Whence is the triple vehicle?
15. What is that which is born of causation? What is effect? What is
cause [or that which works]? Whence the doctrine of duality? Whence
does it arise?
16. Wherefore is the tranquilising exercise of formlessness? And that of
complete extinction? Wherefore the extinction of thoughts? And how is
one awakened from it?
17. How does action rise? Whence is the behaviour of those who hold
the body? Whence [this] visible [world]? Whence the conditions?
Whence the entrance upon the stages?
18. Who is it that breaks through this triple existence? What is the
abode? What is the body? Where does that which is abiding arise?
Whence comes the son of the Buddha?
19. Who attains the psychic faculties, the self-masteries, the Samadhis?
How is the mind tranquilised? Pray tell me, O Bull-like Victor?
20. What is the alaya? And whence the ManoVijnana? How does the
visible [world] rise? How does it cease from being visible?
21. Whence are families and no-families? What is meant by Mind-only?
The setting up of marks? And whence [the doctrine of] egolessness?
22. Why is there no being? What kind of teaching is in accordance with

popular thinking? How can one cease cherishing eternalism (sasvatadarshana) and nihilism (uccheda-darshana)?
23. How is it that you do not differ from the philosophers as regards
appearance? Tell me, whence is the rise of the Nyaya school? Its
future?
24. What is meant by emptiness? What do you understand by
momentary destruction? Whence is the Womb? And whence is the
stability of the world?
25. Why is the world like a vision and a dream? How does it resemble
the city of the Gandharvas? Why it is to be regarded as like a mirage, or
like the moon reflected in water? Pray tell me.
26. What are the elements of enlightenment? Whence are the
constituents of enlightenment? Wherefore is a revolution, and the
disturbance of a kingdom? And how does the realiztic view of existence
(bhavadrishti) take its rise?
27. What is meant by the world being above birth and death? or being
like the flower in the air? How do you understand it? Why do you
regard it as being beyond words?
28. How is it not subject to discrimination? How is it like the sky? Of
how many sorts is suchness? How manifold is the Mind? How many
Paramitas are there?
29. Whence is the gradation of the stages? What is the state of
imagelessness? Wherefore is the twofold egolessness? How is one
cleansed of [the hindrance of] knowledge?
30. Of how many kinds is knowledge (jnana)? O Leader! How many
moral precepts are there? and forms of being? Whence are the families
born of gold and jewel and pearl?

31. Of whom is speech born? Whence is the differentiation of beings?
Whence are the sciences, offices, arts? and by whom are they made
manifest?
32. Of how many sorts are gathas? What is prose? What is metre? Of
how many sorts is reasoning and exegesis?
33. How many varieties of food and drink are there? Whence does
sexual desire originate? Whence are there kings, sovereigns, and
provincial rulers?
34. How does a king protect his dominion? Of how many groups are
heavenly beings? Whence are the earth, stars, constellations, the moon,
and the sun?
35. How many kinds of emancipation are there? of the Yogins? How
many kinds of discipleship? And how about the masters?
36. How many kinds of Buddhahood are there? And how many of the
Jataka Tales? How numerous are the evil ones? How numerous are the
heretics?
37. What is meant by [the doctrine] that there is nothing but thoughtconstruction? Pray tell me, thou Most Eloquent One?
38. Whence are the clouds in the sky? the wind? What is meant by
recollection? by wisdom (medha)? Whence are trees and vines? Pray
tell me, Lord of the Triple World?
39. How do horses, elephants, and deer get caught? Wherefore are
there fools and despicable people? Pray tell me, thou Charioteer of the
Mind?
40. Wherefore are the six seasons mentioned? What is meant by the
Icchantika [one who is without Buddha-nature]? Pray tell me whence is
the birth of a man? of a woman? of a hermaphrodite?

41. How does one retrograde in the Yoga exercises? How does one
make progress in them? How many exercises are there? and how are
men kept abiding in them? Pray tell me.
42. Beings are born in the various paths of existence, what are their
specific marks and forms? How is abundance of wealth acquired? Pray
tell me, thou who art like the sky?
43. Whence is the Sakya family? And the one born of Ikshvaku?
Whence is the Rishi Long-Penance? What is taught by him?
44. How is it that thou art thus apparent everywhere in every land,
surrounded by such Bodhisattvas of such various names and forms?
45. Why is meat not to be eaten? Why is it forbidden? Whence was the
carnivorous race born, who eats meat?
46. Why are the lands shaped like the moon, the sun, the Sumeru, the
lotus, the swatika, and the lion? Pray tell me.
47. Wherefore are the lands shaped like a capsized and upturned net of
Indra which is composed of all sorts of jewels? Pray tell me why?
48. Wherefore are [the lands] shaped in the form of a lute or a drum?
Like various flowers and fruits? Like the sun and the moon which are so
stainless? Pray tell me.
49. Whence are the Buddhas of Transformation? Whence are the
Buddhas of Maturity [or Recompense]? Whence are the Buddhas who
are endowed with transcendental knowledge of suchness? Pray tell me.
50. Why does not one attain enlightenment in the world of desire? Pray
tell me. What is the meaning of your being enlightened in the Akanishtha
by shaking off all the passions?

51. After my passing who will be the upholder of the Discipline [or
Doctrine, sasana]! How long should the teacher abide? How long
should the teaching continue?
52. How many sorts of established truths are there? And how many of
philosophical views? Whence is morality? And what constitutes the
being of a Bhikshu? Pray tell me.
53. What is meant by a state of revulsion [or turning-back]? Whence is
a state of imagelessness, [which is realized] by the Pratyekabuddhas,
Bodhisattvas, and Sravakas?
54. By whom are the psychic powers of this world attained? What are
the super-worldly ones? By what means does the mind enter upon the
seven stages? Pray tell me.
55. How many kinds of Brotherhood are there? And how does a
dissension take place in a Brotherhood! Whence are medical treatises
for beings? Pray tell me.
56. You say that you were among the Buddhas Kasyapa,
Krakuchanda, and Kanakamuni; tell me wherefore so, O Great Muni!
57. Whence is the doctrine that there is no ego-soul in beings? Whence
is the doctrine of eternity, and of annihilation? Wherefore do you not
everywhere announce the doctrine of Mind-only as the truth?
58. What is meant by the forest of men and women? And by the forest
of Karitaki and Amali? Whence are the mountains Kailasa, Cakravada,
and Vajrasamhanana?
59. Among these, whence are the mountains decorated with various
sorts of jewels and filled with Rishis and Gandharvas? Pray tell me.
60. Hearing this [which constitutes] the wonderful doctrine of the
Mahayana and also the most excellent heart of the Buddhas, the Great

Hero, the Buddha, the One Most Excelled in the Knowledge of the
World, [spoke thus]:
61. Well done! Well done! O Mahaprajna-Mahamati! Listen well, and
I will tell you in order regarding your questions.
62. Birth, no-birth, Nirvana, emptiness, transmigration, having-no-selfnature, Buddhas, sons of the Paramitas,
63. The Sravakas, Bodhisattvas, the philosophers, those who are
capable of formless deeds, the Meru, oceans, mountains, islands, lands,
the earth,
64. The stars, the sun, the moon, the philosophers, the Asura,
emancipations, the self-masteries, the psychic faculties, the Dhyanas, the
Samadhis,
65. The extinctions (nirodha), the supernatural powers, the elements of
enlightenment, and the paths, Dhyanas, the unmeasurables, the
aggregates (skandhas), and the comings-and-goings.
66. Samapattis, the extinctions, the stirrings of mind, explanations in
words, the Citta, Manas, and Vijnanas, egolessness, the five Dharmas,
67. Self-nature, the discriminating, the discriminated, the visible [world],
dualism--whence are they? Various forms of vehicles, families, those
born of gold, jewels, and pearls?
68. The Icchantika, the original elements, the wandering-about, one
Buddhahood, knowledge, the known, the marching, the attainment, and
the existence and non-existence of beings?
69. How are horses, elephants, deer caught? Pray tell me how. What is
a proposition, a teaching established by the conjunction of reason and
illustration?

70. Whence is cause and effect? Various errors? and also reason?
[Why the statement that there is] nothing but Mind, that there is no
objective [literally, seen] world, that there is no ascending of the stages?
71. Whence is the state of imagelessness and revulsion which is a
hundredfold? You tell me. Likewise about medical treatises, arts, crafts,
sciences, and teachings?
72. And also what are the measurements of the mountains, Sumeru, and
the earth? What are the measurements of the ocean, moon, and sun?
Tell me.
73. How many particles of dust are there in the body of a being? How
many of the coarser ones, of the finer ones, and of the middle ones?
How many particles of dust in every land? How many in every dhanva?
74. In measuring distance how much is a hasta, a dhanu, a krosa, a
yojana, a half-yojana? How many of rabbit-hairs, of window-dust,
louse-eggs, or ram-hairs, of barley?
75. How many grains of barley in a prastha? How many grains of barley
in a half-prastha? Likewise how many in a drona, in a kharya, a laksha,
a koti, a vimvana?
76. How many atoms are there in a mustard-seed? How many
mustard-seeds are there in a rakshika? How many in a bean, in a
dharana, in a mashaka?
77. How many dharanas are there in a karsha? How many karshas in a
pala? and how many palas are there in Mount Sumeru which is a huge
accumulation [of masses]?
78. You should ask me thus, O son! Why do you ask me otherwise?
How many atoms are there in the body of a Pratyekabuddha, of a
Sravaka, of a Buddha, and of a Bodhisattva? Why do you not ask me
in this wise?

79. How many atoms are there at the top of a flame? How many atoms
are in the wind? How many in each sense-organ? How many in a pore
of the skin? in the eyebrows?
80. Whence are these men of immense wealth, kings, great sovereigns?
How is the kingdom taken care of by them? And how about their
emancipation?
81. Tell whence is prose and metre. Why is sexual desire universally
cherished? Whence is the variety of foods and drinks? Whence the
man-woman forest?
82. Wherefore are the mountains of Vajrasamhanana? Tell me whence,
wherefore; are they like a vision, a dream, and a fata-morgana?
83. Whence is the arising of clouds? And whence do the seasons rise?
Whence is the nature of taste? Whence is woman, man, and
hermaphrodite?
84. Whence are the adornments and the Bodhisattvas? Ask me, O my
son! Whence are the divine mountains embellished by the Rishis and
Gandharvas?
85. Whence is the way of emancipation? Who is in bondage? By whom
is he delivered? What is the state of one who practises tranquillisation?
What is transformation, and who are those philosophers?
86. What is meant by non-existence, existence, and no-effect? Whence
arises the visible world? How can one be cleansed of false intellection?
Whence does false intellection arise?
87. Whence arises action? And whence its departure? Tell me. How
does the extinction of thought take place? And what is meant by a
Samadhi?

88. Who is the one that breaks through the triple world? What is the
position? What is the body? Wherefore the doctrine that beings have no
ego-soul? What is meant by a teaching in accordance with the world?
89. Do you ask me about the marks? Do you ask me about
egolessness? Do you ask me about the womb, about the Nyaya
philosophers, O son of the Victor?
90. How about eternalism and nihilism? How is the mind tranquillised?
Again [how about] speech, knowledge, morality, family, O son of the
Victor?
91. What is meant by reasoning and illustrating, by master and disciple,
by manifoldness of beings, food and drink, sky, intelligence, evil ones,
and the statement that there is nothing but the thought-constructed?
92. What do you ask me concerning trees and vines, O son of the
Victor? What about diversity of lands, and about Long-Penance the
Rishi?
93. What is your family? Who is your master? You tell me, O son of the
Victor. Who are the people who are despised? How is it that in the
Yoga you do not attain enlightenment in the world of desire, but that in
the Akanishtha there is realization?
94. What do you ask me about reasoning? What about the psychic
faculties belonging to this world, and about the nature of a Bhikshu?
95. Do you ask me about Buddhas of Transformation, Buddhas of
Maturity [or Recompense]? About Buddhas of the Knowledge of
Suchness? And whence is the Bodhisattva?
96. You ask me, O son of the Victor, about the lands that are devoid of
light, resembling a lute, a drum, and a flower, and about the mind
abiding in the seven stages?

97. You ask me such and many other questions, which are in
accordance with the marks [of Truth?] and free from erroneous views.

98.1 I will instruct you as regards realization and its teaching; listen to
me intently; I will give you an explanation of the statements, O son,
listen to me, in regard to the one hundred and eight statements as
recounted by the Buddhas.
At that moment Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said to the
Bhagavan: What is meant by the one hundred and eight statements?
The Bhagavan said: A statement concerning birth is no statement
concerning birth; a statement concerning eternity is no statement
concerning eternity. [The topics thus negated are as follows:1] the
characteristic marks, abiding and changing, moment, self-nature,
emptiness, annihilation, mind, the middle, permanence, causation, cause,
the passions, desire, means, contrivance, purity, inference [or
conclusion], illustration, a disciple, a master, a family, the triple vehicle,
imagelessness, vows, the triple circle, form, duality of being and nonbeing, bothness, the noble wisdom of self-realization, the bliss of the
present world, lands, atoms, water, a bow, reality, numbers and
mathematics, the psychic powers, the sky, clouds, the arts and crafts
and sciences, the wind, the earth, thinking, thought-constructions, selfnature, the aggregates, being, insight, Nirvana, that which is known, the
philosophers, disorder, a vision, a dream, a mirage, a reflection, a circle
made in the dark by a fire-brand, the city of the Gandharvas, the
heavens, food and drink, sexuality, philosophical views, the Paramitas,
morality, the moon and the sun and stars, truth, effect, annihilation and
origination, medical treatment, the characteristic marks, the limbs, arts
and sciences, Dhyana, error, the seen [world], protection, dynasty,
Rishi, kingdom, apprehension, treasure, explanation, the Icchantika,
man, woman, and hermaphrodite, taste, action, the body, false
intellection, motives, sense-organs, the Samskrita, cause and effect, the
Kanishtha, the seasons, a luxuriant growth of trees, vines and shrubs,
multiplicity, entering into the teaching, systems of morality, the Bhikshus,

the powers added [by the Buddha], the lutes. These are the one
hundred and eight statements recounted by the Buddhas of the past.

At that moment, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said again to
the Bhagavan: In how many ways, Bhagavan, does the rise, abiding,
and ceasing of the Vijnanas take place?
The Bhagavan replied: There are two ways, Mahamati, in which the
rise, abiding, and ceasing of the Vijnanas take place, and this is not
understood by the philosophers. That is to say, the ceasing takes place
as regards continuation and form. In the rise of the Vijnanas, also, these
two are recognisable: the rise as regards continuation and the rise as
regards form. In the abiding, also, these two [are discernible]: the one
taking place as regards continuation and the other as regards form.
[Further,] three modes are distinguishable in the Vijnanas: (1) the
Vijnana as evolving, (2) the Vijnana as producing effects, and (3) the
Vijnana as remaining in its original nature.
[Further,] Mahamati, in the Vijnanas, which are said to be eight, two
functions generally are distinguishable, the perceiving and the objectdiscriminating. As a mirror reflects forms, Mahamati, the perceiving
Vijna a perceives [objects]. Mahamati, between the two, the perceiving
Vijnana and the object-discriminating Vijnana, there is no difference;
they are mutually conditioning. Then, Mahamati, the perciving Vijnana
functions because of transformation's taking place [in the mind] by
reason of a mysterious habit-energy, while, Mahamati, the objectdiscriminating Vijnana functions because of the mind's discriminating an
objective world and because of the habit-energy accumulated by
erroneous reasoning since beginningless time.
Again, Mahamati, by the cessation of all the sense-Vijnanas is meant the
cessation of the alayaVijnana's variously accumulating habit-energy
which is generated when unrealities are discriminated. This, Mahamati,
is known as the cessation of the form-aspect of the Vijnanas.

Again, Mahamati, the cessation of the continuation-aspect of the
Vijnanas takes place in this wise: that is to say, Mahamati, when both
that which supports [the Vijnanas] and that which is comprehended [by
the Vijnanas] cease to function. By that which supports [the Vijnanas] is
meant the habit-energy [or memory] which has been accumulated by
erroneous reasoning since beginningless time; and by that which is
comprehended [by the Vijnanas] is meant the objective world
perceived and discriminated by the Vijnanas, which is, however, no
more than Mind itself.
Mahamati, it is like a lump of clay and the particles of dust making up its
substance, they are neither different nor not-different; again, it is like
gold and various ornaments made of it. If, Mahamati, the lump of clay is
different from its particles of dust, no lump will ever come out of them.
But as it comes out of them it is not different from the particles of dust.
Again, if there is no difference between the two, the lump will be
indistinguishable from its particles.
Even so, Mahamati, if the evolving Vijnana are different from the
alayaVijnana, even in its original form, the alaya cannot be their cause.
Again, if they are not different the cessation of the evolving Vijnanas will
mean the cessation of the alayaVijnana, but there is no cessation of its
original form. Therefore, Mahamati, what ceases to function is not the
alaya in its original self-form, but is the effect-producing form of the
Vijnanas. When this original self-form ceases to exist, then there will
indeed be the cessation of the alayaVijnana. If, however, there is the
cessation of the alayaVijnana, this doctrine will in no wise differ from the
nihilistic doctrine of the philosophers.
This doctrine, Mahamati, as it is held by the philosophers, is this: When
the grasping of an objective world ceases the continuation of the
Vijnanas is stopped; and when there is no more of this continuation in
the Vijnanas, the continuation that has been going on since beginningless
time is also destroyed. Mahamati, the philosophers maintain that there is
a first cause from which continuation takes place; they do not maintain

that the eye-Vijnana arises from the interaction of form and light; they
assume another cause. What is this cause, Mahamati? Their first cause
is known as spirit (pradhana), soul (purusha), lord (isvara), time, or
atom.

Again, Mahamati, there are seven kinds of self-nature: collection
(samudaya), being (bhava), characteristic marks (lakshana), elements
(mahabhuta), causality (hetu), conditionality (pratyaya), and perfection
(nishpatti).1

Again, Mahamati, there are seven kinds of first principle [or highest
reality, paramartha]: the world of thought (citta-gocara), the world of
knowledge (jnana-), the world of super-knowledge (prajna-), the world
of dualistic views (drishti-), the world beyond dualistic views, the world
beyond the Bodhisattva-stages, and a world where the Tathagata
attains his self-realization.

Mahamati, this is the self-nature, the first principle, the essence, which
constitutes the being of the Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones
of the past, present, and future, whereby, perfecting things of this world
and of a world beyond this, they, by means of a noble eye of
transcendental wisdom, enter into various phases of existence, individual
and general, and establish them. And what is thus established by them is
not to be confused with the erroneous teachings generally held by the
philosophers.
Mahamati, what are these erroneous teachings accepted generally by
the philosophers? [Their error lies in this] that they do not recognise an
objective world to be of Mind itself which is erroneously discriminated;
and, not understanding the nature of the Vijnanas which are also no
more than manifestations of Mind, like simple-minded ones that they
are, they cherish the dualism of being and non-being where there is but
[one] self-nature and [one] first principle.

Again, Mahamati, my teaching consists in the cessation of sufferings
arising from the discrimination of the triple world; in the cessation of
ignorance, desire, deed, and causality; and in the recognition that an
objective world, like a vision, is the manifestation of Mind itself.

Mahamati, there are some Brahmans and Sramanas who assume
something out of nothing, saying that there exists a substance which is
bound up in causation and abides in time, and that the Skandhas,
Dhatus, and ayatanas have their genesis and continuation in causation
and, after thus existing, pass away.
They are those, Mahamati, who hold a destructive and nihilistic view
concerning such subjects as continuation, activity, rising, breaking-up,
existence, Nirvana, the path, karma, fruition, and truth. Why? Because
they have not attained an intuitive understanding [of the Truth], because
they have no fundamental insight of things. Mahamati, it is like a jar
broken in pieces which is unable to function as a jar; again, it is like a
burnt seed which is incapable of sprouting. Even so, Mahamati, their
Skandhas, Dhatus, and ayatanas which they regard as subject to
changes are really incapable of uninterrupted transformation because
their views do not originate from the perception of an objective world
as a manifestation of Mind itself which is erroneously discriminated.
If again, Mahamati, something comes out of nothing and there is the rise
of the Vijnanas by reason of a combination of the three effect-producing
causes, we can say the same of a non-existing thing, that a tortoise
would grow hair and sands produce oil. [As this is impossible] this
proposition does not avail, it ends in affirming nothing. And, Mahamati,
it follows that deed, work, and cause [of which they speak] will be of
no use, and so also with their reference to being and non-being.
Mahamati, when they argue that there is a combination of the three
effect-producing causes, they do this by the principle of cause and
effect [which is to say, by the principle that something comes out of
something and not of nothing]; and thus there are [such things as] past,

present, and future, and being and non-being. As long as they remain on
their philosophic ground, their demonstration will be by means of their
logic and text-books, for the memory of erroneous intellection will ever
cling to them. 1 Thus, Mahamati, simple-minded ones, poisoned by an
erroneous view, declare the incorrect way of thinking taught by the
ignorant to be the one presented by the All-Knowing One.

Again, Mahamati, there are some Brahmans and Sramanas who
recognising that the external world which is of Mind itself is seen as such
owing to the discrimination and false intellection practised since
beginningless time, know that the world has no self-nature and has
never been born, it is like a cloud, a ring produced by a firebrand, the
castle of the Gandharvas, a vision, a mirage, the moon as reflected in
the ocean, and a dream; that Mind in itself has nothing to do with
discrimination and causation, discourses of imagination, and terms of
qualification (lakshya-lakshana); that body, property, and abode are
objectifications of the alayaVijnana,1 which is in itself above [the
dualism of] subject and object; that the state of imagelessness which is
in compliance with the awakening of Mind itself,2 is not affected by
such changes as arising, abiding, and destruction.
The Bodhisattvas-Mahasattvas, Mahamati, will before long attain to the
understanding that Nirvana and Samsara are one. Their conduct,
Mahamati, will be in accordance with the effortless exhibition of a great
loving heart that ingeniously contrives means [of salvation], knowing that
all beings have the nature of being like a vision or a reflection, and that
[there is one thing which is] not bound by causation, being beyond the
distinction of subject and object; [and further] seeing that there is
nothing outside Mind, and in accordance with a position of
unconditionality, they will by degrees pass through the various stages of
Bodhisattvahood and will experience the various states of Samadhi, and
will by virtue of their faith understand that the triple world is of Mind
itself, and thus understanding will attain the Samadhi Mayopama. The
Bodhisattvas entering into the state of imagelessness where they see into
the truth of Mind-only, arriving at the abode of the Paramitas, and

keeping themselves away from the thought of genesis, deed, and
discipline, they will attain the Samadhi Vajravimbopama which is in
compliance with the Tathagatakaya and with the transformations of
suchness. After achieving a revulsion in the abode [of the Vijnanas],
Mahamati, they will gradually realize the Tathagatakaya, which is
endowed with the powers, the psychic faculties, self-control, love,
compassion, and means; which can enter into all the Buddha-lands and
into the sanctuaries of the philosophers; and which is beyond the realm
of Citta-mano-manoVijnana. Therefore, Mahamati, these BodhisattvaMahasattvas who wish, by following the Tathagatakaya, to realize it,
should exercise themselves, in compliance with the truth of Mind-only,
to desist from discriminating and reasoning erroneously on such notions
as Skandhas, Dhatus, ayatanas, thought, causation, deed, discipline,
and rising, abiding, and destruction.

Perceiving that the triple existence is by reason of the habit-energy of
erroneous discrimination and false reasoning that has been going on
since beginningless time, and also thinking of the state of Buddhahood
which is imageless and unborn, [the Bodhisattva] will become
thoroughly conversant with the noble truth of self-realization, will
become a perfect master of his own mind, will conduct himself without
effort, will be like a gem reflecting a variety of colours, will be able to
assume the body of transformation, will be able to enter into the subtle
minds of all beings, and, because of his firm belief in the truth of Mindonly, will, by gradually ascending the stages, become established in
Buddhahood. Therefore, Mahamati, let the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva be
well disciplined in self-realization.

Then Mahamati said: Teach me, Bhagavan, concerning that most subtle
doctrine which explains the Citta, Manas, ManoVijnana, the five
Dharmas, the Svabhavas, and the Lakshanas; which is put in practice
by the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas; which is separated from the state of
mind which recognises a world as something outside Mind itself; and
which, breaking down all the so-called truths established by words and

reasonings, constitutes the essence of the teachings of all the Buddhas.
Pray teach this assembly headed by the Bodhisattvas gathering on
Mount Malaya in the city of Lanka; teach them regarding the
Dharmakaya which is praised by the Tathagatas and which is the realm
of the alayaVijnana which resembles the ocean with its waves. Then the
Bhagavan again speaking to Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said
this: The reasons whereby the eye-consciousness arises are four. What
are they? They are: (1) The clinging to an external world, not knowing
that it is of Mind itself; (2) The attaching to form and habit-energy
accumulated since beginningless time by false reasoning and erroneous
views; (3) The self-nature inherent in the Vijnana; (4) The eagerness for
multiple forms and appearances. By these four reasons, Mahamati, the
waves of the evolving Vijnanas are stirred on the alayaVijnana which
resembles the waters of a flood. The same [can be said of the other
sense-consciousnesses] as of the eye-consciousness. This
consciousness arises at once or by degrees in every sense-organ
including its atoms and pores of the skin; the sense-field is apprehended
like a mirror reflecting objects, like the ocean swept over by a wind.
Mahamati, similarly the waves of the mind-ocean are stirred
uninterruptedly by the wind of objectivity; cause, deed, and appearance
condition one another inseparably; the functioning Vijnanas and the
original Vijnana are thus inextricably bound-up together; and because
the self-nature of form, etc., is not comprehended, Mahamati, the
system of the five consciousnesses (Vijnanas) comes to function. Along
with this system of the five Vijnanas, there is what is known as
ManoVijnana [i. e., the thinking function of consciousness], whereby the
objective world is distinguished and individual appearances are distinctly
determined, and in this the physical body has its genesis. But the
ManoVijnana and other Vijnanas have no thought that they are mutually
conditioned and that they grow out of their attachment to the
discrimination which is applied to the projections of Mind itself. Thus
the Vijnanas go on functioning mutually related in a most intimate
manner and discriminating a world of representations.
As the Vijnanas thus go on functioning [without being conscious of their
own doings], so the Yogins while entering upon a state of tranquillisation

(Samapatti) are not aware of the workings of the subtle habit-energy [or
memory] within themselves; for they think that they would enter upon a
state of tranquillisation by extinguishing the Vijnanas. But [in fact] they
are in this state without extinguishing the Vijnanas which still subsist
because the seeds of habit-energy have not been extinguished; and
[what they imagine to be] an extinction is really the non-functioning of
the external world to which they are no more attached. So it is,
Mahamati, with the subtle working of the alayaVijnana, which, except
for the Tathagata and those Bodhisattvas who are established on the
stages, is not easy to comprehend; [especially] by those who practise
the discipline belonging to the Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and
philosophers, even with their powers of Samadhi and transcendental
knowledge, it is difficult to distinguish. Only those who, understanding
fully all the aspects of the different stages of Bodhisattvahood by the aid
of their transcendental knowledge, acquiring a definite cognition as
regards the meaning of the separate propositions, planting roots of
goodness in the Buddha-lands that know no limits, and keeping
themselves away from the discriminations and false reasonings that arise
from recognising an external world which is of Mind itself, would retire
into a secluded abode in the forest and devote themselves to the
practice of the spiritual discipline, either high, or low, or middling, only
those are capable of obtaining an insight into the flowing of Mind itself in
a world of discrimination, of being baptised by the Buddhas living in the
lands without limits, and of realizing the self-control, powers, psychic
faculties, and Samadhis. Surrounded by good friends and the Buddhas,
Mahamati, they are capable of knowing the Citta, Manas,
ManoVijnana, which are the discriminating agents of an external world
whose self-nature is of Mind itself; they are capable of crossing the
ocean of birth and death which arises by reason of deed, desire, and
ignorance. For this reason, Mahamati, the Yogins ought to exercise
themselves in the discipline which has been given them by their good
friends and the Buddhas.
At that time the Bhagavan recited the following verses:
99. Like waves that rise on the ocean stirred by the wind, dancing and

without interruption,
100. The alaya-ocean in a similar manner is constantly stirred by the
winds of objectivity, and is seen dancing about with the Vijnanas which
are the waves of multiplicity.
101. Dark-blue, red, [and other colours], with salt, conch-shell, milk,
honey, fragrance of fruits and flowers, and rays of sunlight;
102. They are neither different nor not-different: the relation is like that
between the ocean and its waves. So are the seven Vijnanas joined with
the Citta (mind).
103. As the waves in their variety are stirred on the ocean, so in the
alaya is produced the variety of what is known as the Vijnanas.
104. The Citta, Manas, and Vijnanas are discriminated as regards their
form; [but in substance] the eight are not to be separated one from
another, for there is neither qualified nor qualifying.
105. As there is no distinction between the ocean and its waves, so in
the Citta there is no evolution of the Vijnanas.
106. Karma is accumulated by the Citta, reflected upon by the Manas,
and recognised by the ManoVijnana, and the visible world is
discriminated by the five Vijnanas.
107. Varieties of colour such as dark-blue, etc., are presented to our
Vijnana. Tell me, Great Muni, how there are these varieties of colour
like waves [on the ocean]?
108. There are no such varieties of colour in the waves; it is for the sake
of the simple-minded that the Citta is said to be evolving as regards
form.
109. There is no such evolving in the Citta itself, which is beyond

comprehension. Where there is comprehension there is that which
comprehends as in the case of waves [and ocean].
110. Body, property, and abode are presented as such to our Vijnanas,
and thus they are seen as evolving in the same way as are the waves.
111. The ocean is manifestly seen dancing in the state of waveness; how
is it that the evolving of the alaya is not recognised by the intellect even
as the ocean is?
112. That the alaya is compared to the ocean is [only] for the sake of
the discriminating intellect of the ignorant; the likeness of the waves in
motion is [only] brought out by way of illustration.
113. When the sun rises it shines impartially on people high and low; so
thou who art the light of the world shouldst announce the truth (tattvam)
to the ignorant.
114. How is it that in establishing thyself in the Dharma thou announcest
not the truth? If the truth is announced by me, the truth is not in the
mind.2
115. As the waves appear instantly on the ocean, or [images] in a
mirror or a dream, so the mind is reflected in its own sense-fields.3
116. Owing to a deficiency in conditions the evolution [of the Vijnanas]
takes place by degrees.4 The function of the ManoVijnana is to
recognise and that of the Manas is to reflect upon,
117. While to the five Vijnanas the actual world presents itself. There is
no gradation when one is in a state of collectedness (samahita).5 Like
unto a master of painting or his pupils,
118.1 Who arrange colours to produce a picture, I teach. The picture is
not in the colours, nor in the canvas, nor in the plate;

119. In order to make it attractive to all beings, a picture is presented in
colours. What one teaches, transgresses; for the truth (tattva) is beyond
words.
120. Establishing myself in the Dharma, I preach the truth for the
Yogins. The truth is the state of self-realization and is beyond categories
of discrimination.
121. I teach it to the sons of the Victorious; the teaching is not meant
for the ignorant. What is seen as multitudinous is a vision which exists
not.
122. The teaching itself is thus variously given, subject to transgression;
the teaching is no teaching whatever if it is not to the point in each case.
123. According to the nature of a disease the healer gives its medicine;
even so the Buddhas teach beings in accordance with their mentalities.
124. This is indeed not a mental realm to be reached by the
philosophers and the Sravakas; what is taught by the leaders is the
realm of self-realization.

Further, Mahamati, if the Bodhisattva should wish to understand fully
that an external world to be subsumed under categories of
discrimination, such as the grasping (subject) and the grasped (object),
is of Mind itself, let him be kept away from such hindrances as turmoil,
social intercourse, and sleep; let him be kept away from the treatises
and writings of the philosophers, from things belonging to the vehicles of
Sravakahood and Pratyekabuddhahood; let the BodhisattvaMahasattva be thoroughly acquainted with objects of discrimination
which are to be seen as of Mind itself.

Further, Mahamati, when the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva establishes
himself in the abode where he has gained a thorough understanding of

Mind by means of his transcendental knowledge, he should later
discipline himself in the cultivation of noble wisdom in its triple aspect.
What are the three aspects of noble wisdom, Mahamati, in which he has
to discipline himself later? They are: (1) imagelessness; (2) the power
added by all the Buddhas by reason of their original vows; and (3) the
self-realization attained by noble wisdom. Having mastered them, the
Yogin should abandon his knowledge of Mind gained by means of
transcendental wisdom, which still resembles a lame donkey; and
entering upon the eighth stage of Bodhisattvahood, he should further
discipline himself in these three aspects of noble wisdom.
Then again, Mahamati, the aspect of imagelessness comes forth when
all things belonging to the Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas and
philosophers are thoroughly mastered. Again, Mahamati, as to the
power added, it comes from the original vows made by all the Buddhas.
Again, Mahamati, as to the self-realization aspect of noble wisdom, it
rises when a Bodhisattva, detaching himself from viewing all things in
their phenomenality, realizes the Samadhi-body whereby he surveys the
world as like unto a vision, and further goes on to the attainment of the
Buddha-stage. Mahamati, this is the triplicity of the noble life. Furnished
with this triplicity, noble ones will attain the state of self-realization which
is the outcome of noble wisdom. For this reason, Mahamati, you should
cultivate noble wisdom in its triple aspect.

At that moment, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva knowing what
was going on in the minds of the Bodhisattvas who were gathered there,
and empowered by the power added to him by all the Buddhas, asked
the Bhagavan concerning the doctrine known as examining into the
reality of noble wisdom. Tell me, Bhagavan, the doctrine of examining
into the reality of noble wisdom, depending on which the one hundred
and eight statements are to be distinguished--the doctrine depending on
which the Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones will analyse and
disclose the nature and course of false imagination for the sake of the
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas who have fallen into the way of looking at
things from their aspects of generality and individuality. Thus the

Bodhisattvas will be instructed in the analysis and thorough examination
of false imagination, and thereby they will have the passage purified
which leads to the egolessness of things and persons, and get an
illumination on the stages of Bodhisattvahood; and, further, going
beyond the bliss of the tranquillisations1 belonging to all the Sravakas,
Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers, will attain the Dharmakaya of the
Tathagata, which belongs to the realm and course of Tathagatahood
transcending thought and in which there is no rising of the five Dharmas.
That is to say, they will attain the Tathagata-body which is the Dharma
intimately bound up with the understanding born of transcendental
knowledge, and which, entering into the realm of Maya, reaches all the
Buddha-lands, the heavenly mansions of Tushita, and the abode of the
Akanishtha.

Said the Bhagavan: Mahamati, there are some philosophers who are
addicted to negativism, according to whose philosophical view the nonexistence of the hare's horns is ascertained by means of the
discriminating intellect which affirms that the self-nature of things ceases
to exist with the destruction of their causes; and they say that all things
are non-existent just like the hare's horns.
Again, Mahamati, there are others who, seeing distinctions existing in
things as regards the elements, qualities, atoms, substances, formations,
and positions, and, attached to the notion that the hare's horns are nonexistent, assert that the bull has horns.
There are, Mahamati, those who have fallen into the dualistic way of
thinking, being unable to comprehend the truth of Mind-only; they
desire to discriminate a world which is of Mind itself. Mahamati, body,
property, and abode have their existence only when measured in
discrimination. The hare's horns neither are nor are not; no
discrimination is to be made about them. So it is, Mahamati, with all
things, of which neither being nor non-being can be predicated; have no
discrimination about them!

Again, Mahamati, those who have gone beyond being and non-being,
no more cherish the thought that the hare has no horns; for they never
think that the hare has no horns because of mutual reference, nor do
they think that the bull has horns because no ultimate substance is to be
obtained however minutely the analysis of the horns may go on even to
the subtlest particle known as atom: [that is,] the state in which noble
wisdom is realized is beyond being and non-being.
At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said this to the
Bhagavan: Is it not this way, Bhagavan, that, seeing how discrimination
takes place, we proceed to refer this to the non-rising of discrimination
and infer that the horns exist not?
The Bhagavan said: No, indeed, Mahamati, the non-existence of the
horns has no reference to the non-rising of discrimination. Why is it not
so? Because there is discrimination owing to the idea of the horns.
Indeed, depending upon the idea of the horns, Mahamati, discrimination
takes place. And because of this dependence of discrimination upon the
idea of the horns, Mahamati, and because of this relationship of
dependence and apart from the anyananya1 relationship, one talks of
the non-existence of the hare's horns, surely not because of the
reference [to the horns of the bull]. If again, Mahamati, discrimination is
different (anya) from the hare's horns, it will not take place by reason of
the horns [and therefore the one is not different from the other]; but if it
is not different (ananya), there is a discrimination taking place by reason
of the horns [and therefore the one is different from the other]. However
minutely the atoms are analysed, no horn [-substance] is obtainable; the
notion of the horns itself is not available when thus reasoned. As neither
of them [that is, the bull's nor the hare's] are existent, in reference to
what should we talk of non-existence? Therefore, Mahamati, the
reasoning by reference as regards the non-existence of the hare's horns
is of no avail. The non-existence of the hare's horns is asserted in
reference to their existence [on the bull; but really a horn itself has no
existence from the beginning]; have therefore no discrimination about it!
Mahamati, the dualism of being and non-being as held by the
philosophers does not obtain as we see in the reasoning of horns.

Again, Mahamati, there are other philosophers affected with erroneous
views, who are attached to such notions as form, cause, and figure; not
fully understanding the nature of space and seeing that space is disjoined
from form, they proceed to discriminate about their separate existences.
But, Mahamati, space is form, and, Mahamati, as space penetrates into
form, form is space. To establish the relation of supporting and
supported, Mahamati, there obtains the separation of the two, space
and form. Mahamati, when the elements begin to evolve [a world] they
are distinguishable one from another; they do not abide in space, and
space is not non-existent in them.
It is the same with the hare's horns, Mahamati, whose non-existence is
asserted in reference to the bull's horns. But, Mahamati, when the bull's
horns are analysed to their minutest atoms, which in turn are further
analysed, there is after all nothing to be known as atoms. The nonexistence of what, is to be affirmed in reference to what? As to the
other things, too, this reasoning from reference does not hold true.
At that time, again, the Bhagavan said this to Mahamati the
Bodhisattva-Mahasattva; Mahamati, you should discard the views and
discriminations that are concerned with the horns of a hare and a bull,
with space and form. And also, Mahamati, let you and other
Bodhisattvas reflect on the nature of discrimination which they have of
the Mind itself, and let them go into all the Bodhisattva-lands where they
should disclose the way of disciplining themselves in the manifestations
of Mind itself.

Then at that time the Bhagavan recited these verses:
125. The world [as we see it] exists not, pluralities of things rise from
the Mind being seen [externally]; body, property, and abode are
manifested to us as of the alayaVijnana.

126. The leaders talk about the Citta, Manas, [Mano-]Vijnana, the
[triple] Svabhava, the five Dharmas, the twofold egolessness, and
purification.
127. Long and short, etc., exist mutually bound up; when existence is
asserted, there is non-existence, and where non-existence is asserted,
there is existence.
128. Analysed down to atoms, there is indeed no form to be
discriminated as such; what can be established is the [truth of] Mindonly, which is not believed by those who cherish erroneous views.
129. This does not belong to the realm of the theoreticians nor to that of
the Sravaka; the Buddhas disclose the way of self-realization.

At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva made a
request of the Bhagavan regarding the purification of the outflow which
comes from recognising an objective world which is of Mind itself,
saying, How, O Bhagavan, is the outflow purified that takes place from
recognising an external world which is of Mind itself? Is the purification
instantaneous or gradual?
Replied the Bhagavan: The outflow that takes place from recognising an
external world which is of Mind itself is gradually purified and not
instantaneously. Mahamati, it is like the amra fruit which ripens gradually
and not instantaneously; in the same way, Mahamati, the purification of
beings1 is gradual and not instantaneous. Mahamati, it is like the potter
making pots, which is done gradually and not instantaneously; in the
same way, Mahamati, the purification of beings by the Tathagata is
gradual and not instantaneous. Mahamati, it is like grass, shrubs, herbs,
and trees, that grow up gradually from the earth and not instantaneously;
in the same way, Mahamati, the purification by the Tathagata of beings
is gradual and not instantaneous; Mahamati, it is like the mastery of
comedy, dancing, singing, music, lute-playing, writing, and [other] arts,
which is gained gradually and not instantaneously; in the same way,

Mahamati, the purification by the Tathagata of all beings is gradual and
not instantaneous.
Mahamati, it is like a mirror indiscriminately and instantaneously
reflecting in it forms and images; in the same way, Mahamati, the
purification by the Tathagata of all beings is instantaneous, who makes
them free from discrimination and leads them to the state of
imagelessness. Mahamati, it is like the sun or the moon revealing all
forms instantaneously by illuminating them with its light; in the same way,
Mahamati, the Tathagata, by making all beings discard the habit-energy
which issues from the erroneous views they entertain in regard to an
external world which is of the Mind, instantaneously reveals to all beings
the realm of unthinkable knowledge which belongs to Buddhahood. It is
like the alayaVijnana making instantaneously a world of body, property,
and abode, which is what is seen of Mind itself; in the same way,
Mahamati, the Nishyanda-Buddha, instantaneously maturing the
mentality of beings, places them in the palatial abode of the Akanishtha
mansion where they will become practisers of various spiritual
exercises. Mahamati, it is like the Dharmata-Buddha shining forth
instantaneously with the rays that issue from the Nishyanda-Nirmana [Buddha]; in the same way, Mahamati, the noble truth of self-realization
instantaneously shines out when the false [dualistic] views of existence
and non-existence are discarded.

And yet again, Mahamati, what the Dharniata-Nishyanda-Buddha [that
is, the Buddha that flows out of the absolute Dharma] teaches is that all
things are comprehensible under the aspects of individuality and
generality, for they are bound up with causes and conditions of habitenergy which is accumulated by not recognising an external world as of
Mind itself; that by reason of clinging to these false imaginations there is
multitudinousness of unrealities, which resemble the various scenes and
persons created magically and imagined as really in existence. Further
again, Mahamati, false imaginations arise from clinging to the notion of
relativity. To illustrate: when the magician depending upon grass, wood,
shrubs, and creepers, exercises his art, all beings and forms take shape,

magically-created persons are produced, which appear endowed with
individuality and material body, and they are variously and fancifully
discriminated. While they are thus manifesting themselves, Mahamati,
there is no substantiality in them. Likewise, Mahamati, based on the
notion of relativity the false imagination recognises a variety of
appearances which are distinguished by a discriminating mind. And as
their individual appearances are imagined and adhered to, there is habitenergy, and, Mahamati, so long as the fancying goes on we have here
all that is needed to constitute the self-nature of the false imagination.
Mahamati, this is the discourse of the Nishyanda Buddha.
Again, Mahamati, it is the doing of the Dharmata-Buddha to establish
the exalted state of self-realization which transcends the phenomena of
the [empirical] mind.
Again, Mahamati, what the Nirmita-Nirmana-Buddha [or Buddha of
transformation] establishes concerns such matters as charity, morality,
meditation, tranquillisation, various forms of transcendental knowledge
and of understanding, the Skandhas, Dhatus, and ayatanas,
emancipation, the Vijnanas, and the ways in which they function, the
forms which they take, their distinctions and their performances. The
Buddha discloses against the philosophical views that which surpasses
forms.
Again Mahamati, the Dharmata-Buddha is unconditioned, free from
conditions, has nothing to do with all doings, senses, and measurements,
and does not belong to the world of the ignorant, Sravakas,
Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers, who are always clinging to the
notion of an ego. For this reason, Mahamati, you should discipline
yourself in the excellent and exalted way leading to self-realization; you
should keep yourself away from the views that recognise the reality of
an external world apart from the Mind itself.

Further again, Mahamati, in the life of the Sravaka-vehicle, there are
two aspects to be distinguished, namely, the excellent and exalted state

of self-realization, and the attachment to the notion of self-nature arising
from discrimination. What is the excellent, exalted state of selfrealization belonging to the Sravakas? This is a state of mental
concentration which is attained when one realizes states of emptiness,
egolessness, suffering, and impermanence, and the truth that is free from
passions and is ever serene; when one annihilates notions belonging to
the externality of things, such as the Skandhas, Dhatus, ayatanas,
individuality and generality; and when one has an insight into reality as it
is. Entering upon this state of mental concentration the Sravakas will
attain the blissful abode of exalted self-realization in which there is the
emancipation belonging to a Dhyana, the path and fruit of a Samadhi,
and the deliverance of a Samapatti, but in which there is as yet no
discarding of habit-energy and no escape from the imperceivable
transformation of death. This, Mahamati, is the Sravaka's exalted state
of self-realization. Having attained this exalted and blissful condition of
self-realization as realized by the Sravakas, Mahamati, the BodhisattvaMahasattva may not enjoy by himself the bliss of cessation, the bliss of
Samapatti, but should think compassionately of other beings and keep
ever fresh his original vows. Mahamati, in whatever exalted and blissful
state of self-realization the Bodhisattva may find himself, he should
never exert himself in the exalted and blissful state of self-realization as
attained by the Sravakas.
Mahamati, what is meant by the attachment to the notion of self-nature
arising from discrimination? This attachment takes place when a man,
seeing that the elements and the qualities such as blue, yellow, warmth,
humidity, motility, and rigidity, have never been created by a creator,
yet clings to the notions of individuality and generality in accordance
with the measures laid down in books of logic. Mahamati, the
Bodhisattva, knowing what this is, must abandon it. Conforming himself
to the egolessness of things and holding back the wrong views regarding
the egolessness of a person, the Bodhisattva should keep himself on the
continuously-ascending journey along the stages. This is the Sravaka's
attachment to the notion of self-nature arising from the discrimination of
existence.

At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said this to the
Bhagavan: According to the Bhagavan's teaching, the eternalunthinkable is the exalted condition of self-realization and also of highest
reality. Now, do not the philosophers also talk about the creative agent
being the eternal-unthinkable?
The Bhagavan replied: No, Mahamati, the eternal-unthinkable
considered by the philosophers to be characteristic of their creator is
untenable. Why? Because, Mahamati, the eternal-unthinkable as held
by the philosophers is not in conformity with the idea of a cause itself.
When, Mahamati, this eternal-unthinkable is not in conformity with the
idea of a cause itself how can this be proved tenable? Again, Mahamati,
if what is claimed to be the eternal-unthinkable is in conformity with the
idea of a cause [which is eternal] in itself, it can be eternal; but since the
idea of a creator is based upon that of a [further] cause, it cannot be the
eternal-unthinkable.
But, Mahamati, my highest reality is the eternal-unthinkable since it
conforms to the idea of a cause and is beyond existence and nonexistence. Because it is the exalted state of self-realization it has its own
character; because it is the cause of the highest reality it has its
causation; because it has nothing to do with existence and non-existence
it is no doer; because it is to be classed under the same head as space,
Nirvana, and cessation it is eternal. Therefore, Mahamati, it is not the
same as the eternal-unthinkable of the philosophers; the eternalunthinkable of the Tathagatas is thatness realized by noble wisdom
within themselves. For this reason, Mahamati, let the BodhisattvaMahasattva discipline himself in order to attain by means of noble
wisdom the truth of self-realization which is the eternal-unthinkable.
Again, further, Mahamati, the eternal-unthinkable of the philosophers is
not characterised with eternality because it has a cause which is not
eternal; what they regard as eternal is not eternal as it is not
characterised with the power that can create itself. If again, Mahamati,
the philosophers prove the eternality of their eternal-unthinkable in

contradistinction to the becoming and therefore the non-eternality of
things created, Mahamati, by the same reasoning I can prove that their
eternality has no reason to be known as such just because things
created are non-eternal owing to their becoming.
If again, Mahamati, the eternal-unthinkable of the philosophers is in
conformity with the idea of a cause, what they regard as characteristic
of a cause is a non-entity like the horns of a hare; and, Mahamati, their
eternal-unthinkable is no more than a verbal discrimination, in which,
Mahamati, the philosophers' fault consists. Why? Because, Mahamati,
mere verbal discriminations are, indeed, the hare's horns, on account of
their having no characteristic of a self-cause. Mahamati, moreover, my
eternal-unthinkable is really eternal because it finds its cause in the
exalted state of self-realization, and because it has nothing to do with a
creator, with being and non-being. Its eternality is not derived from the
reasoning which is based upon the external notion of being and nonbeing, of eternity and non-eternity. If the eternal-unthinkable is eternal in
consideration of the non-existence and eternality of external things, we
can say of this kind of the eternal-unthinkable that the philosophers do
not know what is meant by characteristically self-caused. As they are
outside the state of self-realization attainable by noble wisdom,
Mahamati, their discourse is not to the point.

Further, Mahamati, those who, afraid of sufferings arising from the
discrimination of birth-and-death, seek for Nirvana, do not know that
birth-and-death and Nirvana are not to be separated the one from the
other; and, seeing that all things subject to discrimination have no reality,
imagine that Nirvana consists in the future annihilation of the senses and
their fields. They are not aware, Mahamati, of the fact that Nirvana is
the alayaVijnana where a revulsion takes place by self-realization.
Therefore, Mahamati, those who are stupid talk of the trinity of vehicles
and not of the state of Mind-only where there are no images. Therefore,
Mahamati, those who do not understand the teachings of the Tathagatas
of the past, present, and future, concerning the external world, which is
of Mind itself, cling to the notion that there is a world outside what is

seen of the Mind and, Mahamati, go on rolling themselves along the
wheel of birth-and-death.

Further, Mahamati, according to the teaching of the Tathagatas of the
past, present, and future, all things are unborn. Why? Because they
have no reality, being manifestations of Mind itself, and, Mahamati, as
they are not born of being and non-being, they are unborn. Mahamati,
all things are like the horns of the hare, horse, donkey, or camel, but the
ignorant and simple-minded who are given up to their false and
erroneous imaginations, discriminate things where they are not;
therefore, all things are unborn. That all things are in their self-nature
unborn, Mahamati, belongs to the realm of self-realization attained by
noble wisdom, and does not belong essentially to the realm of dualistic
discrimination cherished by the ignorant and simple-minded. The selfnature and the characteristic marks of body, property, and abode
evolve when the alayaVijnana is conceived by the ignorant as grasping
and grasped; and then they fall into a dualistic view of existence where
they recognise its rise, abiding, and disappearance, cherishing the idea
that all things are born and subject to discrimination as to being and
non-being. Therefore, Mahamati, you should discipline yourself therein
[i. e. in self-realization].

Again further, Mahamati, there are five groups of people, each of whom
attains its own [spiritual] insight. What are the five? They are: (1) the
group of people whose insight belongs to the Sravaka-vehicle; (2) the
group of people whose insight belongs to the Pratyekabuddha-vehicle;
(3) the group of people whose insight belongs to the Tathagata-vehicle;
(4) the group of indefinite character; and (5) the group of people to
whom no insight is possible.
Mahamati, how does one know the group of people whose insight
belongs to the Sravaka vehicle? There are people the hair of whose
body will stand on end when they know and realize the nature of the
Skandhas, Dhatus, ayatanas, and [what is meant by] generality and

individuality; their intellect will leap with joy on knowing and practising
what belongs to appearance and not on practising what they know of
the uninterrupted chain of causation, --such ones, Mahamati, are said to
be of the group whose insight belongs to the Sravaka vehicle. Having
had an insight into their own vehicle, they abide at the fifth or the sixth
stage where they do away with the rising of the passions, but not with
the habit-energy; they have not yet passed beyond the inconceivable
transformation-death, and their lion-roar is, "My life is destroyed, my
morality is established, etc."; they will then discipline themselves in the
egolessness of persons and finally gain the knowledge of Nirvana.
Again, Mahamati, there are others who, believing in such things as ego,
being, vital principle, nourisher, supreme spirit, or personal soul, will
seek Nirvana in them. Again, Mahamati, there are still others who,
seeing that all things exist by depending upon causes, will recognise in
this the way to Nirvana. But, Mahamati, as they have no insight into the
egolessness of things, there is no emancipation for them. This,
Mahamati, is where those of the Sravaka-vehicle and the philosophers
make the mistake in their insight by regarding non-deliverance as
deliverance. Therefore, Mahamati, you ought to discipline yourself in
order to escape this wrong view.
Now, Mahamati, they belong to the group of the Pratyekabuddhavehicle who will shed tears and feel the hair of their body stand on end
when the Pratyekabuddha's insight is shown to them. When the teaching
to keep themselves away from social relations and entanglements, not to
become attached to the external world and its manifold form, to
perform miraculous powers by which they can divide their own body
and appear double or perform the transformations, is disclosed to them,
they are thereby entreated. Recognising that they are of the group
whose insight belong to the Pratyekabuddha-vehicle, their discourses
will be in conformity with the insight of the Pratyekabuddha-vehicle.
This, Mahamati, is the characteristic feature of the group of people
whose insight belongs to the Pratyekabuddha-vehicle.
Now, Mahamati, three aspects are distinguishable in the insight

belonging to the group of the Tathagata-vehicle. They are: (1) an insight
whereby one sees into the self-nature of things, which is no self-nature;
(2) an exalted insight which is the attainment of self-realization; and (3)
an insight into the immensity of the external Buddha-lands. When,
Mahamati, these three aspects are disclosed one after another and also
when the inconceivable realm of the alayaVijnana is disclosed, where
body, property, and abode are seen to be the manifestation of Mind
itself, a man will not be frightened, nor terrified, nor show any sign of
fear; then such a one is to be known as of the group of people whose
insight belongs to the Tathagata-vehicle. This is, Mahamati, the
characteristic feature of the insight of those who belong to the
Tathagata-vehicle.
Again, Mahamati, when these three forms of insight are disclosed to a
man, he may thereby be pursuaded to discipline himself in them. This,
Mahamati, is the stage of preparation for the establishment of his own
group. In order that he may go up to the stage of imagelessness, there is
this establishment. But the Sravaka who will purify his own habit-energy
of passions by attaining an inner perception into the alaya and by seeing
into the egolessness of things, will settle himself in the bliss of the
Samadhi and finally will attain the body of Tathagatahood.

Then the Bhagavan recited these verses:
130. The fruit of the Stream-entered, and that of the Once-to-come; the
fruit of the Not-to-come and Arhatship-- all these are due to mental
perturbation.
131. The triple vehicle, the one vehicle, and the no-vehicle, of these I
talk, for the sake of the dull-witted, and [also] for the wise, solitudeloving ones.
132. The gate of highest reality has nothing to do with the two forms of
thought-construction [subject and object]; Where the imageless stands,
why should we establish the triple vehicles?

133. The Dhyanas, the immeasurables, and the no-form Samadhis, and
the thought-cessation--all these are not at all found in Mind-only.

Again, Mahamati, how is it that the Icchantika1 never awaken the
desire for emancipation? Because they have abandoned all the stock of
merit, and because they cherish certain vows for all beings since
beginningless time. What is meant by abandoning all the stock of merit?
It refers to [those Buddhists] who have abandoned the Bodhisattva
collection [of the canonical texts], making the false accusation that they
are not in conformity with the sutras, the codes of morality, and the
emancipation. By this they have forsaken all the stock of merit and will
not enter into Nirvana. Secondly again, Mahamati, there are
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas who, on account of their original vows made
for all beings, saying, "So long as they do not attain Nirvana, I will not
attain it myself," keep themselves away from Nirvana. This, Mahamati,
is the reason of their not entering into Nirvana, and because of this they
go on the way of the Icchantika.

Again, Mahamati said; Who, Bhagavan, would never enter Nirvana?
The Bhagavan replied: Knowing that all things are in Nirvana itself from
the very beginning, the Bodhisattva-Icchantika would never enter
Nirvana. But those Icchantikas who have forsaken all the stock of merit
[finally] do. Those Icchantikas, Mahamati, who have forsaken all the
stock of merit might some day be influenced by the power of the
Tathagatas and be induced at any moment to foster the stock of merit.
Why? Because, Mahamati, no beings are left aside by the Tathagatas.
For this reason, Mahamati, it is the Bodhisattva-Icchantika who never
enters into Nirvana.

Further, Mahamati, let the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva be well acquainted
with the three kinds of Svabhava (self-nature). [What are the three?

They are (1) false discrimination, (2) knowledge of relativity, and (3)
perfect knowledge.] Now, Mahamati, false discrimination rises from
form (nimitta). How, Mahamati, does it rise from form? In [the
consideration of] the relativity aspect of Svabhava, realities appear in
various ways, as having forms, signs, and shapes; when, Mahamati,
these objects, forms, and signs are adhered to [as real], this adherence
takes place in two ways. The Tathagatas, Arhats, and Fully-Enlightened
Ones thus declare false discrimination to consist in attachment to names
and attachment to objects. By the attachment to objects is meant,
Mahamati, to get attached to inner and external things [as realities]. By
the attachment to names is meant to recognise in these inner and
external things the characteristic marks of individuality and generality
and to regard them as definitely belonging to the objects. These two
modes of attachment, Mahamati, constitute false discrimination. The
knowledge of the relativity-aspect (paratantra) rises from the separation
of subject (asraya) and object (alambana).
Now, Mahamati, what is perfect knowledge? It is realized when one
casts aside the discriminating notions of form, name, reality, and
character; it is the inner realization by noble wisdom. This perfect
knowledge, Mahamati, is the essence of the Tathagata-garbha.
Then the Bhagavan recited this verse:
134. Form, Name, and Discrimination [correspond to] the two forms of
Svabhava, and Right Knowledge and Suchness [correspond to] the
Perfect Knowledge aspect.
This, Mahamati, is called the doctrine that examines into the nature of
the five Dharmas and the two Svabhavas (self-nature), and constitutes
the state of self-realization attained by noble wisdom, and in this you
and other Bodhisattvas are to discipline yourselves.

Further again, Mahamati, let the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva have a
thorough understanding as to the nature of the twofold egolessness.

Mahamati, what is this twofold egolessness? [It is the egolessness of
persons and the egolessness of things. What is meant by egolessness of
persons? It means that] in the collection of the Skandhas, Dhatus, and
ayatanas there is no ego-substance, nor anything belonging to it; the
Vijnana is originated by ignorance, deed, and desire, and keeps up its
function by grasping objects by means of the sense-organs, such as the
eye, etc., and by clinging to them as real; while a world of objects and
bodies is manifested owing to the discrimination that takes place in the
world which is of Mind itself, that is, in the alayaVijnana. By reason of
the habit-energy stored up by false imagination since beginningless time,
this world (vishaya) is subject to change and destruction from moment
to moment; it is like a river, a seed, a lamp, wind, a cloud; [while the
Vijnana itself is] like a monkey who is always restless, like a fly who is
ever in search of unclean things and defiled places, like a fire which is
never satisfied. Again, it is like a water-drawing wheel or a machine, it
[i. e., the Vijnana] goes on rolling the wheel of transmigration, carrying
varieties of bodies and forms, resuscitating the dead like the demon
Vetala, causing the wooden figures to move about as a magician moves
them. Mahamati, a thorough understanding concerning these
phenomena is called comprehending the egolessness of persons.
Now, Mahamati, what is meant by the egolessness of things? It is to
realize that the Skandhas, Dhatus, and ayatanas are characterised with
the nature of false discrimination. Mahamati, since the Skandhas,
Dhatus, and ayatanas are destitute of an ego-substance, being no more
than an aggregation of the Skandhas, and subject to the conditions of
mutual origination which are causally bound up with the string of desire
and deed; and since thus there is no creating agent in them, Mahamati,
the Skandhas are even destitute of the marks of individuality and
generality; and the ignorant, owing to their erroneous discrimination,
imagine here the multiplicity of phenomena; the wise, however, do not.
Recognising, Mahamati, that all things are devoid of the Citta, Manas,
ManoVijnana, the five Dharmas, and the [three] Svabhavas, the
Bodhisattva-Mahasattva will well understand what is meant by the
egolessness of things.

Again, Mahamati, when the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva has a good
understanding as regards the egolessness of things, before long he will
attain the first stage [of Bodhisattvahood] when he gets a definite
cognition of the imageless. When a definite acquisition is obtained
regarding the aspect of the stages [of Bodhisattvahood], the
Bodhisattva will experience joy, and, gradually and successively going
up the scale, will reach the ninth stage where his insight is perfected, and
[finally the tenth stage known as] Great Dharmamegha. Establishing
himself here, he will be seated in the great jewel palace known as
"Great Lotus Throne" which is in the shape of a lotus and is adorned
with various sorts of jewels and pearls; he will then acquire and
complete a world of Maya-nature; surrounded by Bodhisattvas of the
same character and anointed like the son of the Cakravarti by the hands
of the Buddhas coming from all the Buddha-lands, he will go beyond
the last stage of Bodhisattvahood, attain the noble truth of selfrealization, and become a Tathagata endowed with the perfect freedom
of the Dharmakaya, because of his insight into the egolessness of things.
This, Mahamati, is what is meant by the egolessness of all things, and in
this you and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas should well exercise
yourselves.

At that time, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said this to the
Bhagavan: Pray teach me about making an assertion and refuting it so
that I and other Bodhisattvas, getting rid of the erroneous views that
may rise from assertion and refutation, may at once realize supreme
enlightenment. Having been enlightened they would keep themselves
away from the eternalistic assertions as well as from the nihilistic
refutations, and leave your enlightenment eye unrefuted.
Then the Bhagavan again, understanding the request of Mahamati the
Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, recited this verse:
135. Assertions and refutations are not to be found in the Mind-only;
the ignorant who understand not that the Mind is [seen in] the form of
body, property, and abode, wander about with assertions and

refutations.
At that moment the Bhagavan said this to elucidate the meaning of this
verse: Mahamati, there are four forms of assertion made concerning
things not in existence. What are the four? (1) The assertion about
individual marks that are non-existent; (2) the assertion about
philosophical views which are non-existent [i. e., not true]; (3) the
assertion about a cause which is non-existent; and (4) the assertion
about objects that are non-existent. These, Mahamati, are the four
assertions.
Again, Mahamati, what is meant by the refutation? It means not
examining properly, because of ignorance, any assertions based on
errors. This, Mahamati, is what characterises assertion and refutation.
Further, Mahamati, what are the characteristics of the assertion made
about individual marks that have no existence? It concerns the marks of
individuality and generality in the Skandhas, Dhatus and ayatanas, which
do not really exist; but taking them for realities and getting attached to
them, a man may affirm that they are just so and not otherwise. This,
Mahamati, characterises the assertion of individual marks which are
non-existent.1 This assertion and discrimination, Mahamati, concerning
individual marks that are not existent, rises from one's attachment to the
habit-energy which is amassed, since beginningless time, by varieties of
erroneous views issuing from false imagination. This, Mahamati,
characterises the assertion of individual marks which are non-existent.
Again, Mahamati, by the assertion of philosophical views which are
non-existent [i. e., not true], is meant that in the Skandhas, Dhatus, and
ayatanas, [some philosophers] assume the existence of an ego, a being,
a soul, a living being, a nourisher, or a spirit. This is said, Mahamati, to
be the assertion of some philosophical views which are nonexistent [i.
e., not true].

Again, Mahamati, by the assertion of a cause that is nonexistent is

meant that [some philosophers] assume the causeless birth of a first
Vijnana, which later comes to have a Maya-like non-existence; that is
to say, the originally unborn Vijnana begins to function under the
conditions of eye, form, light, and memory. The functioning goes on for
a while and then ceases. This, Mahamati, is the assertion of a cause that
is non-existent.
Again, Mahamati, the assertion about objects that are not-existent is an
assertion arising from the attachment to such non-working existences as
space, cessation, and Nirvana. These, Mahamati, are neither existent
nor nonexistent; for all things are devoid of the alternatives of being and
non-being and are to be known, Mahamati, as the horns of a hare, a
horse, or a camel, or like a hair-net. They are discriminated as realities
by the ignorant who are addicted to assertions and refutations as their
intelligence has not penetrated into the truth that there is nothing but
what is seen of the Mind itself. It is otherwise with the wise. This,
Mahamati, is the characteristic point of the assertion about objects
which are non-existent. For this reason, Mahamati, one should avoid
the views based on assertion and refutation.

Further, Mahamati, the Bodhisattvas who are thoroughly acquainted
with the nature of the Citta, Manas, and ManoVijnana, of the five
Dharmas, of the [three] Svabhavas, and of the twofold Egolessness, will
assume various personalities for the sake of benefitting others, just like
the imagination that evolves from the seat of the relativity knowledge,
and again, like the mysterious gem that reflects varieties of colours.
Going over to all the Buddha-lands and assemblages, the Bodhisattvas
will listen to the Buddhas, discourse on the nature of all things which are
like a vision, a dream, an illusion, a reflection, and the lunar vision in
water, and which have nothing to do with birth-and-death, eternality,
and extinction; the Bodhisattvas, thus facing the Tathagatas, will listen to
their discourses on the truth that does not belong to the Sravaka- and
Pratyekabuddha-vehicle. They will then attain a hundred thousand
Samadhis, indeed, a hundred thousand niyutas of kotis of Samadhis,
and by means of these Samadhis they will go around from one country

to another; they will do homage to the Buddhas, be born in all the
celestial mansions, where they will discourse on the Triple Treasure,
manifesting Buddha-bodies; and, surrounded by Sravakas and
Bodhisattvas, they will, in order to free them from the alternatives of
being and non-being, instruct them to understand thoroughly what is
meant by an objective world which is nothing but Mind itself and in
which there are no realities.
At that time the Bhagavan recited this verse:
136. When those who are born of the Buddha see that the world is no
more than Mind itself, they will obtain a body of transformation, which
has nothing to do with effect-producing works, but which is endowed
with the powers, psychic faculties, and self-control.

At that time again Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva made a
request of the Bhagavan. Tell me, Bhagavan, how all things are empty,
unborn, non-dual, and have no self-nature, so that I and other
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas might be awakened in the teaching of
emptiness, no-birth, non-duality, and the absence of self-nature, and,
quitting the discrimination of being and non-being, quickly realize the
highest enlightenment.
Then the Bhagavan said this to Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva:
Now, Mahamati, listen well and reflect well upon what I tell you.
Replied Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, I will indeed,
Bhagavan. The Bhagavan said: Emptiness, emptiness, indeed!
Mahamati, it is a term whose self-nature is false imagination. Because of
one's attachment to false imagination, Mahamati, we have to talk of
emptiness, no-birth, non-duality, and absence of self-nature. In short,
then, Mahamati, there are seven kinds of emptiness: (1) The emptiness
of individual marks (lakshana), (2) the emptiness of self-nature
(bhavasvabhava), (3) the emptiness of no-work (apracarita), (4) the
emptiness of work (pracarita), (5) the emptiness of all things in the

sense that they are unpredicable (nirabhilapya), (6) the emptiness in its
highest sense of ultimate reality realizable only by noble wisdom, and (7)
the emptiness of mutuality (itaretara) which is the seventh.
Mahamati, what then is the emptiness of individual marks? It is that all
things have no [such distinguishing] marks of individuality and generality.
In consideration of mutuality and accumulation, [things are thought to be
realities], but when they are further investigated and analysed,
Mahamati, they are non-existent, and not predicable with individuality
and generality; and because thus no such ideas as self, other, or both,
hold good, Mahamati, the individual marks no longer obtain. So it is
said that all things are empty as to their self-marks.
Again, Mahamati, what is meant by the emptiness of self-nature?
Mahamati, it is that all things in their self-nature are unborn, hence the
emptiness of self-nature, and it is therefore said that things are empty in
their self-nature.
Again, Mahamati, what is meant by the emptiness of no-work? It is that
the Skandhas are Nirvana itself and there is no work doing in them from
the beginning. Therefore, one speaks of the emptiness of no-work.
Again, Mahamati, what is meant by the emptiness of work? It is that the
Skandhas are devoid of an ego and its belongings, and go on
functioning when there is a mutual conjunction of cause and action. Thus
one speaks of the emptiness of work.
Again, Mahamati, what is meant by the emptiness of all things in the
sense that they are unpredicable? It is that the nature of the false
imagination is not expressible, hence the emptiness of all things in the
sense of their unpredicability. Thus one speaks of the emptiness of
unpredicability.
Again, Mahamati, what is meant by the emptiness in its highest sense of
ultimate reality realizable by noble wisdom? It is that in the attainment of
an inner realization by means of noble wisdom there is no trace of habit-

energy generated by all the erroneous conceptions [of beginningless
past]. Thus one speaks of the highest emptiness of ultimate reality
realizable by noble wisdom.
Again, Mahamati, what is meant by the emptiness of mutual [nonexistence]? It is this: when a thing is missing here, one speaks of its
being empty there. For instance, Mahamati, in the lecture-hall of the
Mrigarama there are no elephants, no bulls, no sheep, but as to the
Bhikshus I can say that the hall is not devoid of them; it is empty only as
far as they [i. e. the animals] are concerned. Further, Mahamati, it is not
that the lecture-hall is devoid of its own characteristics, nor that the
Bhikshu is devoid of this Bhikshuhood, nor that in some other places,
too, elephants, bulls, and sheep are not to be found. Mahamati, here
one sees all things in their aspect of individuality and generality, but from
the point of view of mutuality (itaretara) some things do not exist
somewhere. Thus one speaks of the emptiness of mutual [nonexistence].
These, Mahamati, are the seven kinds of emptiness of which mutuality
ranks the lowest of all and is to be put away by you.
Again, Mahamati, not that things are not born, but that they are not born
of themselves, except when seen in the state of Samadhi--this is what is
meant by "all things are unborn." To have no self-nature is, according to
the deeper sense, to be unborn, Mahamati. That all things are devoid of
self-nature means that there is a constant and uninterrupted becoming, a
momentary change from one state of existence to another; seeing this,
Mahamati, all things are destitute of self-nature. So one speaks of all
things having no self-nature.
Again, Mahamati, what is meant by non-duality? It means that light and
shade, long and short, black and white, are relative terms, Mahamati,
and not independent of each other; as Nirvana and Samsara are, all
things are not-two. There is no Nirvana except where is Samsara; there
is no Samsara except where is Nirvana; for the condition of existence is
not of mutually-exclusive character.1 Therefore, it is said that all things

are non-dual as are Nirvana and Samsara. For this reason, Mahamati,
you should discipline yourself in [the realization of] emptiness, no-birth,
non-duality, and no-self-nature.
Then at that time the Bhagavan recited this couplet of verses:
137. I always preach emptiness which is beyond eternalism and nihilism;
Samsara is like a dream and a vision, and karma vanishes not.
138. Space, Nirvana, and the two forms of cessation-- thus the ignorant
discriminate the things which are not effect-producing, but the wise
stand above being and non-being.
At that time again, the Bhagavan said this to Mahamati the BodhisattvaMahasattva; This [teaching of] emptiness, no-birth, non-duality, and noself-nature is found in all the sutras of all the Buddhas, and this doctrine
is recognised in every one of them. However. Mahamati, the sutras are
the teaching in conformity with the dispositions of all beings and deviate
from the [real] sense, and not the truth-preserving statement. Mahamati,
it is like unto the mirage which entices the deer with its treacherous
springs, the springs are not there but the deer are attached, imagining
them to be real. So with the teachings disclosed in all the sutras, they
are for all beings for the gratification of their own discriminating minds.
They are not the truth-preserving statements meant for noble wisdom to
grasp. For this reason, Mahamati, be in conformity with the sense and
be not engrossed in the word-teaching.

At that time, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said this to the
Bhagavan: Now the Bhagavan makes mention of the Tathagata-garbha
in the sutras, and verily it is described by you as by nature bright and
pure, as primarily unspotted, endowed with the thirty-two marks of
excellence, hidden in the body of every being like a gem of great value,
which is enwrapped in a dirty garment, enveloped in the garment of the
Skandhas, Dhatus, and ayatanas, and soiled with the dirt of greed,
anger, folly, and false imagination, while it is described by the Bhagavan

to be eternal, permanent, auspicious, and unchangeable. Is not this
Tathagata-garbha taught by the Bhagavan the same as the egosubstance taught by the philosophers? The ego as taught in the systems
of the philosophers is an eternal creator, unqualified, omnipresent, and
imperishable.
The Bhagavan replied: No, Mahamati, my Tathagata-garbha is not the
same as the ego taught by the philosophers; for what the Tathagatas
teach is the Tathagata-garbha in the sense, Mahamati, that it is
emptiness, reality-limit, Nirvana, being unborn, unqualified, and devoid
of will-effort; the reason why the Tathagatas who are Arhats and FullyEnlightened Ones, teach the doctrine pointing to the Tathagata-garbha is
to make the ignorant cast aside their fear when they listen to the
teaching of egolessness and to have them realize the state of nondiscrimination and imagelessness. I also wish, Mahamati, that the
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas of the present and future would not attach
themselves to the idea of an ego [imagining it to be a soul]. Mahamati, it
is like a potter who manufactures various vessels out of a mass of clay
of one sort by his own manual skill and labour combined with a rod,
water, and thread, Mahamati, that the Tathagatas preach the
egolessness of things which removes all the traces of discrimination by
various skilful means issuing from their transcendental wisdom, that is,
sometimes by the doctrine of the Tathagata-garbha, sometimes by that
of egolessness, and, like a potter, by means of various terms,
expressions, and synonyms. For this reason, Mahamati, the
philosophers' doctrine of an ego-substance is not the same as the
teaching of the Tathagata-garbha. Thus, Mahamati, the doctrine of the
Tathagata-garbha is disclosed in order to awaken the philosophers from
their clinging to the idea of the ego, so that those minds that have fallen
into the views imagining the non-existent ego as real, and also into the
notion that the triple emancipation is final, may rapidly be awakened to
the state of supreme enlightenment. Accordingly, Mahamati, the
Tathagatas who are Arhats and Fully-Enlightened Ones disclose the
doctrine of the Tathagata-garbha which is thus not to be known as
identical with the philosopher's notion of an ego-substance. Therefore.
Mahamati, in order to abandon the misconception cherished by the

philosophers, you must strive after the teaching of egolessness and the
Tathagata-garbha.

At that moment then the Bhagavan recited this verse:
139. The personal soul, continuity, the Skandhas, causation, atoms, the
supreme spirit, the ruler, the creator, --[they are] discriminations in the
Mind-only.
At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva in consideration of
future generations made this request again of the Bhagavan: Pray tell
me, Bhagavan, about the perfecting of the discipline whereby the
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas become great Yogins.
The Bhagavan replied: There are four things, Mahamati, by fulfilling
which the Bodhisattvas become great Yogins. What are the four? They
are: (1) To have a clear understanding as to what is seen of Mind
itself,2 (2) to discard the notions of birth, abiding, and disappearance,
(3) to look into [the truth] that no external world obtains, and (4) to
seek for the attainment of inner realization by noble wisdom. Provided
with these four things the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas become great
Yogins.

How, Mahamati, does the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva come to have a
clear understanding as to what is seen of Mind itself? He comes to it by
recognising that this triple world is nothing but Mind itself, devoid of an
ego and its belongings, with no strivings, no comings-and-goings; that
this triple world is manifested and imagined as real, under the influence
of the habit-energy accumulated since beginningless time by false
reasoning and imagination, and with the multiplicity of objects and
actions in close relationship, and in conformity with the ideas of
discrimination, such as body, property, and abode. Thus, Mahamati, the
Bodhisattva-Mahasattva acquires a thoroughly clear understanding as to
what is seen of Mind itself.

How again, Mahamati, does the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva discard
notions of birth, abiding, and disappearance? By this it is meant that all
things are to be regarded as forms born of a vision or a dream and have
never been created since there are no such things as self, the other, or
bothness. [The Bodhisattvas] will see that the external world exists only
in conformity with Mind-only; and seeing that there is no stirring of the
Vijnanas and that the triple world is a complicated network of causation
and owes its rise to discrimination, they find that all things, inner and
external, are beyond predicability, that there is nothing to be seen as
self-nature, and that [the world] is not to be viewed as born; and
thereby they will conform themselves to the insight that things are of the
nature of a vision, etc., and attain to the recognition that things are
unborn. Establishing themselves on the eighth stage of Bodhisattvahood,
they will experience a revulsion [in their consciousness] by transcending
the Citta, Manas, and ManoVijnana, and the five Dharmas, and the
[three] Svabhavas, and the twofold Egolessness, and thereby attain the
mind-made body (Manomayakaya). Thus, Mahamati, the BodhisattvaMahasattva will discard the notion of birth, abiding, and
disappearance.1
Said Mahamati,1 what is meant by the will-body, Bhagavan? The
Bhagavan replied: It means that one [in this body] can speedily move
unobstructed as he wills; hence the will-body, Mahamati. For instance,
Mahamati, the will [or mind] travels unobstructed over mountains, walls,
rivers, trees, etc., many a hundred thousand yojanas they may be away,
when a man recollects the scenes which had previously come into his
perception, while his own mind keeps on functioning in his body without
the least interruption or hindrance. In the same fashion, Mahamati, the
will-body, in the attainment of the Samadhi called Maya-like and
adorned with such marks as the powers, the psychic faculties, and the
self-control, will be born in the noble paths and assemblies, moving
about as freely as he wishes, as he recalls his original vows and worlds
in order to bring all beings to maturity.
Then, Mahamati, what is meant by the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva having

a good insight into the non-existence of external objects? It means,
Mahamati, that all things are like unto a mirage, a dream, a hair-net; and
seeing that all things are here essentially because of our attachment to
the habit-energy of discrimination which has been maturing since
beginningless time on account of false imagination and erroneous
speculation, the Bodhisattvas will seek after the attainment of selfrealization by their noble wisdom. Mahamati, furnished with these four
things, Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas become great Yogins. Therefore, in
these, Mahamati, you should exercise yourself.

At that time Mahamati again made a request of the Bhagavan: Pray tell
me, Bhagavan, about the causation of all things, whereby I and other
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas can see into the nature of causation, and by
getting rid of the discrimination [which issues in the philosophical views
of] eternalism and nihilism, we may no more discriminate as to the
gradual or simultaneous rising of all things.
Replied the Bhagavan: Mahamati, there are two factors of causation by
which all things come into existence: external and inner. Mahamati, the
external factors are a lump of clay, a stick, a wheel, thread, water, a
worker, and his labour, the combination of all of which produces a jar.
As with the jar, Mahamati, which is made of a lump of clay, or a piece
of cloth made of thread, or a matting made of fragrant grass, or the
sprout growing out of a seed, or fresh butter which is produced from
sour milk by a man churning it with his own labour, so it is, Mahamati,
with all things which, governed by external causes, appear one after
another in continuous succession. As regards the inner factors of
causation, Mahamati, they are of such kind as ignorance, desire, and
action, which make up our idea of causation. Born of these, Mahamati,
there is the manifestation of the Skandhas, Dhatus, and ayatanas. They
are not separable [realities]1 but discriminated [as such] by the ignorant.
Now, Mahamati, there are six causes: (1) possibility-cause, (2)
dependence-cause, (3) objectivity-cause, (4) agency-cause, (5)
manifesting-cause, and (6) indifference-cause.2 The possibility-cause

means, Mahamati, that when a cause to be becomes effective there is
the rising of things inner and outer. The dependence-cause means,
Mahamati, that when conditions to be, become effective there is the
rising of the Skandha-seeds, etc., inner and outer. Further, the
objectivity-cause means, Mahamati, that bound by the objective world
[the Vijnana] keeps up its continuous activity. Again, Mahamati, the
agency-cause means that like a sovereign king a cause invested with
supreme authority asserts itself. Again, the manifesting-cause means that
when the discriminating faculty rises, as the result it reveals individual
marks as a lamp does forms, etc. Lastly, the indifference-cause means
that when there is a dissolution the power of combination discontinues,
and there rises a state of non-discrimination.
These, Mahamati, are the outcome of discrimination carried on by the
ignorant and simple-minded, and there is no gradual nor simultaneous
rising of existence. Why? Because, Mahamati, if there is a simultaneous
rising of existence, there would be no distinction between cause and
effect, and there would be nothing to characterise a cause as such. If a
gradual rising is admitted, there is no substance that holds together
individual signs, which makes gradual rising impossible. While a child is
not yet born, Mahamati, the term father has no significance.1 The
logician argues that there is that which is born and that which gives birth
by the mutual functioning of such causal factors as cause, subsistence,
continuity, acceleration, and others; and they conclude that there is a
gradual rising of existence. But, Mahamati, this gradual rising does not
obtain except by reason of their attachment to the notion of self-nature.
When the [ideas of] body, property, and abode are cherished in what is
nothing but the manifestation of Mind itself, the external world is
perceived under the aspects of individuality and generality, which,
however, are not realities; and therefore, Mahamati, neither a gradual
nor a simultaneous rising of things is possible. It is only when the
Vijnana evolves by reason of discrimination which discriminates the
manifestation of Mind itself [that existence is said to come into view].
For this reason, Mahamati, you must strive to get rid of notions of
gradation and simultaneity in the combination of the causal activities.
Thus it is said:

140. Nothing whatever is born or ceases to exist by reason of
causation; when causation is discriminated there is birth and cessation.
141. It is not to keep off the idea of birth and disappearance which
takes place in causation; it is to keep off the wrong imagination as to
causation, which is cherished by the ignorant.
142. The being and non-being of things subject to causation has no
reality; the triple world owes its existence to the Mind put into confusion
by reason of habit-energy.
143. Not ever being in existence, what things are there that are born?
[but] in causation nothing is lost; when effect-producing objects
(samskrita) are regarded as like unto a barren woman's child or a
flower in the sky, one perceives that grasping (subject) and grasped
(object) are an error and desists [from committing the same error].
144. There is nothing that is to be born, nor is there anything that has
been born; even causation is not; it is because of wordly usage that
things are talked of as existing.

At that moment again Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said this
to the Bhagavan: Pray tell me, Bhagavan, about the teaching known as
the essence of discrimination as regards words, whereby, Bhagavan, I
and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas, comprehending and becoming well
acquainted with the essence of discrimination as regards words, will be
thoroughly informed of the signification of two things, expression and
expressed, and, thereby immediately attaining supreme enlightenment,
will explain the signification of these two things, expression and
expressed, for the purification of all beings.
Replied the Bhagavan: Then, Mahamati, listen well and reflect well, for I
will tell you about it.

Well done! said Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva and listened to
the Bhagavan.
The Bhagavan said this to him: There are, Mahamati, four kinds of
word-discrimination. They are: (1) Words denoting individual marks,
(2) dream-words, (3) words growing out of the attachment to
erroneous speculations and discriminations, and (4) words growing out
of the discrimination that knows no beginning.
Now, Mahamati, the words denoting individual marks rise from
discriminating forms and characteristic signs as real in themselves and
becoming attached to them. The dream-words, Mahamati, rise from the
unreal surroundings which reveal themselves [before the mind] when it
recollects its previous experience. The words growing out of the
attachment to erroneous speculations and discriminations, Mahamati,
rise from recollecting deeds once previously committed. The words
growing out of the discrimination that has been functioning since
beginningless time, Mahamati, rise from the habit-energy whose seeds
have been growing out of the clinging to erroneous speculations and
false imaginations since beginningless time. I say, Mahamati, these are
the four features of word-discrimination, which is the answer to your
question.

At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva requested of
the Bhagavan to speak on this subject: Pray tell me again, Bhagavan,
about the conditions whereby the word-discrimination manifests itself.
Where, whence, how, and by whom do words indicating discrimination
take place among the people?
Said the Bhagavan: Mahamati, the word-discrimination goes on taking
place by the coordination of the head, chest, nose, throat, palate, lips,
tongue, and teeth.
Said Mahamati; Again, Bhagavan, are words to be considered different
(anya) or not-different (ananya) from discrimination?

Replied the Bhagavan: Mahamati, they are neither different nor notdifferent. Why? Because words rise, Mahamati, with discrimination as
their cause. If, Mahamati, words are different from discrimination, they
cannot have it for cause. Then if they are not different, words cannot
express the sense, which they do. Therefore, words and discrimination
are neither different nor not-different.
Then Mahamati said: Again, Bhagavan, are words themselves the
highest reality? or is what is expressed in words the highest reality?
The Bhagavan replied: Mahamati, words are not the highest reality, nor
is what is expressed in words the highest reality. Why? Because the
highest reality is an exalted state of bliss, and as it cannot be entered
into by mere statements regarding it, words are not the highest reality.
Mahamati, the highest reality is to be attained by the inner realization of
noble wisdom; it is not a state of word-discrimination; therefore,
discrimination does not express the highest reality. And then, Mahamati,
words are subject to birth and destruction; they are unsteady, mutually
conditioning, and are produced by the law of causation. And again,
Mahamati, what is mutually conditioning and produced by the law of
causation cannot express the highest reality, because the indications
[pointing to the distinction between] self and not-self are non-existent.
Mahamati, words are these indications and do not express [the highest
reality].
Further, Mahamati, word-discrimination cannot express the highest
reality, for external objects with their multitudinous individual marks are
non-existent, and only appear before us as something revealed out of
Mind itself. Therefore, Mahamati, you must try to keep yourself away
from the various forms of word-discrimination.

Thus it is said:
145. In all things there is no self-nature, words too are devoid of reality;

as the ignorant understand not what is meant by emptiness, yes, by
emptiness, they wander about.
146. In all things there is no self-nature, they are mere words of people;
that which is discriminated has no reality; [even] Nirvana is like a
dream; nothing is seen to be in transmigration, nor does anything ever
enter into Nirvana.
147. As a king or a wealthy householder, giving his children various
clay-made animals, pleases them and makes them play [with the toys],
but later gives them real ones; 148. So, I, making use of various forms
and images of things, instruct my sons; but the limit of reality (bhutakoti)
can [only] be realized within oneself.

At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva again said this to the
Bhagavan: Pray tell me, Bhagavan, about the attainment of selfrealization by noble wisdom, which does not belong to the path and the
usage of the philosophers; which is devoid of [all such predicates as]
being and non-being, oneness and otherness, bothness and notbothness, existence and non-existence, eternity and non-eternity; which
has nothing to do with the false imagination, nor with individuality and
generality; which manifests itself as the truth of highest reality; which,
going up continuously by degrees the stages of purification, enters upon
the stage of Tathagatahood; which, because of the original vows
unattended by any striving, will perform its works in infinite worlds like a
gem reflecting a variety of colours; and which is manifested [when one
perceives how] signs of individuation rise in all things as one realizes the
course and realm of what is seen of Mind itself, and thereby I and other
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas are enabled to survey things from the point of
view which is not hampered by marks of individuality and generality nor
by anything of the false imagination, and may quickly attain supreme
enlightenment and enable all beings to achieve the perfection of all their
virtues.
Replied the Bhagavan: Well done, well done, Mahamati! and again, well

done, indeed, Mahamati! Because of your compassion for the world,
for the benefit of many people, for the happiness of many people, for
the welfare, benefit, happiness of many people, both of celestial beings
and humankind, Mahamati, you present yourself before me and make
this request. Therefore, Mahamati, listen well and truly, and reflect, for I
will tell you.
Assuredly, said Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, and gave ear to
the Bhagavan.
The Bhagavan said this to him: Mahamati, since the ignorant and the
simple-minded, not knowing that the world is what is seen of Mind
itself, cling to the multitudinousness of external objects, cling to the
notions of being and non-being, oneness and otherness, bothness and
not-bothness, existence and non-existence, eternity and non-eternity, as
being characterised by self-nature which rises from discrimination based
on habit-energy, they are addicted to false imaginings. Mahamati, it is
like a mirage in which the springs are seen as if they were real. They are
imagined so by the animals who, thirsty from the heat of the season,
would run after them. Not knowing that the springs are their own mental
hallucinations, the animals do not realize that there are no such springs.
In the same way, Mahamati, the ignorant and simple-minded with their
minds impressed by various erroneous speculations and discriminations
since beginningless time; with their minds burning with the fire of greed,
anger, and folly; delighted in a world of multitudinous forms; with their
thoughts saturated with the ideas of birth, destruction, and subsistence;
not understanding well what is meant by existent and non-existent, by
inner and outer; the ignorant and simple-minded fall into the way of
grasping at oneness and otherness, being and non-being. Mahamati, it is
like the city of the Gandharvas which the unwitted take for a real city,
though it is not so in fact. This city appears in essence owing to their
attachment to the memory of a city preserved in seed from beginningless
time. This city is thus neither existent nor non-existent. In the same way,
Mahamati, clinging to the memory (vasana) of erroneous speculations
and doctrines since beginningless time, they hold fast to ideas such as
oneness and otherness, being and non-being, and their thoughts are not

at all clear about what is seen of Mind-only. Mahamati, it is like a man,
who, dreaming in his sleep of a country variously filled with women,
men, elephants, horses, cars, pedestrians, villages, towns, hamlets,
cows, buffalos, mansions, woods, mountains, rivers, and lakes enters
into its inner appartments and is awakened. While awakened thus, he
recollects the city and its inner apartments. What do you think,
Mahamati? Is this person to be regarded as wise, who is recollecting
the various unrealities he has seen in his dream?
Said Mahamati: Indeed, he is not, Bhagavan.
The Bhagavan continued: In the same way the ignorant and simpleminded who are bitten by erroneous views and are inclined toward the
philosophers, do not recognise that things seen of the Mind itself are like
a dream, and are held fast by the notions of oneness and otherness, of
being and non-being. Mahamati, it is like the painter's canvas on which
there is no depression nor elevation as imagined by the ignorant. In the
same way, Mahamati, there may be in the future some people brought
up in the habit-energy, mentality, and imagination based on the
philosophers' erroneous views; clinging to the ideas of oneness and
otherness, of bothness and not-bothness, they may bring themselves
and others to ruin; they may declare those people nihilists who hold the
doctrine of no-birth apart from the alternatives of being and non-being.
They [argue against] cause and effect, they are followers of the wicked
views whereby they uproot meritorious causes of unstained purity. They
are to be kept far away by those whose desires are for things excellent.
They are those whose thoughts are entangled in the errors of self, other,
and both, in the errors of imagining being and non-being, assertion and
refutation, and hell will be their final refuge. Mahamati, it is like the dimeyed ones who, seeing a hair-net, would exclaim to one another, saying:
"It is wonderful! it is wonderful! Look, O honourable sirs!" And the said
hair-net has never been brought into existence. It is in fact neither an
entity nor a non-entity, because it is seen and not seen. In the same
manner, Mahamati, those whose minds are addicted to discrimination of
the erroneous views as cherished by the philosophers, and who are also
given up to the realiztic ideas of being and non-being, oneness and

otherness, bothness and not-bothness, will contradict the good Dharma,
ending in the destruction of themselves and others. Mahamati, it is like a
firebrand-wheel which is no real wheel but which is imagined to be of
such character by the ignorant, but not by the wise. In the same manner,
Mahamati, those whose minds have fallen into the erroneous views of
the philosophers will falsely imagine in the rise of all beings oneness and
otherness, bothness and not-bothness.
Mahamati, it is like those water-bubbles in a rainfall which have the
appearance of crystal gems, and the ignorant taking them for real crystal
gems run after them. Mahamati, they are no more than water-bubbles,
they are not gems, nor are they not-gems, because of their being so
comprehended [by one party] and being not so comprehended [by
another]. In the same manner, Mahamati, those whose minds are
impressed by the habit-energy of the philosophical views and
discriminations will regard things born as nonexistent and those
destroyed by causation as existent.
1Further, Mahamati, by setting up the three forms of measure and the
[five] members of a syllogism, [the philosophers] make the
discrimination that there is a reality existing by itself, which is attained by
the realization of noble wisdom, and devoid of the two Svabhavas.
[This discrimination however is] not right. [The Buddhist doctrine is
this:] Mahamati, when a [psychological] revulsion takes place in the
Yogins [by the transcendence of] the Citta, Manas, and Vijnana, they
cast off the [dualistic] discrimination of grasped and grasping in what is
seen of Mind itself, and entering the Tathagata-stage attain the
realization of noble wisdom; and in this there is no thought of existence
and non-existence. Again, Mahamati, if there is the grasping of
existence and non-existence in the realm attained by the Yogins, there
will be in them the grasping of an ego, a nourisher, a supreme soul, or a
person. Again, Mahamati, the teaching pointing to self-nature,
individuality and generality of things, is that of the Transformation
Buddha and not that of the Dharmata Buddha. Again, Mahamati, such
teaching is meant for the ignorant, being in conformity with their
mentality, their way of thinking and viewing things; any establishment

that favours the way of self-nature, fails to reveal the truth of selfrealization to be attained by noble wisdom and the blissful abode of the
Samadhi.
Mahamati, it is like the trees reflected in water; they are reflections and
yet are not-reflections, the trees are [real] figures, and yet no-figures. In
the same manner, Mahamati, those who are impressed by the habitenergy of the philosophical views carry on their discrimination regarding
oneness and otherness, bothness and not-bothness, being and nonbeing, for their minds are not enlightened as regards what is seen of
Mind-only.
Mahamati, it is like a mirror reflecting all colours and images as afforded
by the conditions and without discrimination; and they are neither
images nor not-images, because they are seen as images and also as
not-images. And, Mahamati, they are discriminated forms of what is
seen of Mind itself, which are known to the ignorant as images. In the
same manner, Mahamati, oneness and otherness, bothness and notbothness, are reflected images of Self-Mind while they appear as if real.
Mahamati, it is like an echo giving the sound of a human voice, of a
river, or of the wind; it is neither existent nor non-existent, because it is
heard as a voice and yet as not a voice. In the same way, Mahamati,
the notions of being and non-being, oneness and otherness, bothness
and not-bothness are the discriminations of Self-Mind and habit-energy.
Mahamati, it is like a mirage which in conjunction with the sun appears
with its flowing waves on the earth where there are no grass, shrubs,
vines, and trees. They are neither existent nor non-existent, according to
the desire for them or its absence. In the same way, Mahamati, the
discriminating Vijnana of the ignorant which is impressed with the habitenergy of false imaginations and speculations since beginningless time, is
stirred like a mirage even in the midst of reality revealed by means of
noble wisdom, by the waves of birth, subsistence, and destruction, of
oneness and otherness, bothness and not-bothness, being and nonbeing.

Mahamati, it is like Pisaca who by means of his spell makes a corpse or
a wooden image throb with life though it has no power of its own; but
here the ignorant cling to the non-existent imagining them to have the
power of movement. In the same way, Mahamati, the ignorant and
simple-minded committing themselves to the erroneous philosophical
views are thoroughly devoted to the ideas of oneness and otherness, but
their assertion is not at all well grounded. For this reason, Mahamati, in
order to attain the noble reality attainable within yourself, you should
cast off the discriminations leading to the notions of birth, abiding, and
destruction, of oneness and otherness, bothness and not-bothness,
being and non-being.
Therefore, it is said:
149. The Skandhas, of which the Vijnana is the fifth, resemble the
reflections of the trees in water; they are to be regarded as Maya and a
dream, they are so by thought-construction; make no discriminations!
150. This triple world resembles a hair-net, or water in a mirage which
is agitated; it is like a dream, Maya; and by thus regarding it one is
emancipated.
151. Like a mirage in the spring-time, the mind is found bewildered;
animals imagine water but there is no reality to it.
152. Thus the Vijnana-seed is evolved and the world comes into view;
the ignorant imagine it is born, just like the dim-eyed ones perceive
things in the darkness.
153. Since beginningless time, the ignorant are found transmigrating
through the paths, enwrapped in their attachment to existence; as a
wedge is induced by another wedge, they are led to the abandonment
[of their wrappage].
154. By regarding the world as always like a magically-moving corpse,

or a machine, or like a dream, or a lightning, or a cloud; the triple
continuation is torn asunder and one is emancipated.
155. There is here nothing of thought-construction, it is like an image in
the air; when they thus understand all there is nothing to know.
156. Here is nothing but thought-construction and name. You seek in
vain for individual signs; the Skandhas are like a hair-net wherein
discrimination goes on.
157. A world of multitudes1 is a hair-net, a vision, a dream, and the city
of the Gandharvas; it is [a wheel made by] a firebrand, a mirage; it is a
non-entity, only an appearance to people.
158. Eternity and non-eternity; oneness, too, bothness and notbothness as well: these are discriminated by the ignorant who are
confused in mind and bound up by errors since beginningless time.
159. In a mirror, in water, in an eye, in a vessel, and on a gem, images
are seen; but in them there are no images [i. e. realities] anywhere to
take hold of.
160. Like a mirage in the air, so is a variety of things mere appearance;
they are seen in diversity of forms, but are like a child in a barren
woman's dream.

Further, Mahamati, the religious teaching of the Tathagatas is free from
the four statements. That is, it is devoid of oneness and otherness, of
bothness and not-bothness, is free from being and non-being, assertion
and refutation; the religious teaching of the Tathagatas is headed by the
[four noble] truths, the [twelvefold] chain of origination, and [the
eightfold noble] path leading to emancipation. The religious teaching of
the Tathagatas, Mahamati, is not fastened to these ideas: Prakriti,
Isvara, causelessness, spontaneity, atoms, time and self-nature. Again,
Mahamati, [the Tathagatas, leading beings] successively forwards like

the leader of a caravan, in order to purify them from the two hindrances
of passion and knowledge, will establish them in the one hundred and
eight statements of imagelessness and also in the characteristic
distinctions of the vehicles, of the stages [of Bodhisattvahood], and of
the constituents [of enlightenment].

Further, Mahamati, there are four kinds of Dhyanas. What are the four?
They are: (1) The Dhyana practised by the ignorant, (2) the Dhyana
devoted to the examination of meaning, (3) the Dhyana with Tathata
(suchness) for its object, and (4) the Dhyana of the Tathagatas.
What is meant by the Dhyana practised by the ignorant? It is the one
resorted to by the Yogins exercising themselves in the discipline of the
Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas, who perceiving that there is no egosubstance, that things are characterised with individuality and generality,
that the body is a shadow and a skeleton which is transient, full of
suffering and is impure, persistently cling to these notions which are
regarded as just so and not otherwise, and who starting from them
successively advance until they reach the cessation where there are no
thoughts. This is called the Dhyana practised by the ignorant.
Mahamati, what then is the Dhyana devoted to the examination of
meaning? It is the one [practised by those who,] having gone beyond
the egolessness of things, individuality and generality, the untenability of
such ideas as self, other, and both, which are held by the philosophers,
proceed to examine and follow up the meaning of the [various] aspects
of the egolessness of things and the stages of Bodhisattvahood. This is
the Dhyana devoted to the examination of meaning.
What, Mahamati, is the Dhyana with Tathata for its object? When [the
Yogins recognise that] the discrimination of the two forms of
egolessness is mere imagination, and that where he establishes himself in
the reality of suchness (yathabhuta) there is no rising of discrimination, I
call it the Dhyana with Tathata for its object.

What, Mahamati, is the Dhyana of the Tathagata? When [the Yogin],
entering upon the stage of Tathagatahood and abiding in the triple bliss
which characterises self-realization attained by noble wisdom, devotes
himself for the sake of all beings to the [accomplishment of]
incomprehensible works, I call it the Dhyana of the Tathagatas.
Therefore, it is said:
161. There are the Dhyana for the examination of meaning, the Dhyana
practised by the ignorant; the Dhyana with Tathata for its object, and
the pure Dhyana of the Tathagata.
162. The Yogin, while in his exercise, sees the form of the sun or the
moon, or something looking like a lotus, or the underworld, or various
forms like sky, fire, etc.
163. All these appearances lead him to the way of the philosophers;
they throw him down into the state of Sravakahood, into the realm of
the Pratyekabuddhas.
164. When all these are tossed aside and there is a state of
imagelessness, then a condition in conformity with Tathata presents
itself; and the Buddhas will come together from all their countries and
with their shining hands will stroke the head of this benefactor.

At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva again said this to the
Bhagavan: Thou speakest of Nirvana, Bhagavan. What is meant by this
term Nirvana?
Replied the Bhagavan: When the self-nature and the habit-energy of all
the Vijnanas, including the alaya, Manas, and ManoVijnana, from which
issues the habit-energy of wrong speculations--when all these go
through a revulsion, I and all the Buddhas declare that there is Nirvana,
and the way and the self-nature of this Nirvana is emptiness, which is
the state of reality.

Further, Mahamati, Nirvana is the realm of self-realization attained by
noble wisdom, which is free from the discrimination of eternality and
annihilation, existence and non-existence. How is it not eternality?
Because it has cast off the discrimination of individuality and generality,
it is not eternality. How about its not being annihilation? It is because all
the wise men of the past, present, and future have attained realization.
Therefore, it is not annihilation.
Again, Mahamati, the great Parinirvana is neither destruction nor death.
Mahamati, if the great Parinirvana is death, then it will be a birth and
continuation. If it is destruction, then it will assume the character of an
effect-producing deed. For this reason, Mahamati, the great Parinirvana
is neither destruction nor death. Neither has it anything to do with
vanishing;l it is the goal of the Yogins. Again, Mahamati the great
Parinirvana is neither abandonment nor attainment, neither is it of one
meaning nor of no-meaning; this is said to be Nirvana.
Further, Mahamati, Nirvana conceived by the Sravakas and
Pratyekabuddhas consists in recognising individuality and generality, in
escaping social intercourse, in not having a perverted view of the world,
and not raising discrimination. This is their notion of Nirvana.

Further, Mahamati, there are two kinds of characteristic signs of selfnature. What are these two kinds? They are the attachment to words as
having self-nature, and the attachment to objects as having self-nature.
The attachment to words as having self-nature, Mahamati, takes place
owing to one's clinging to the habit-energy of words and false imaginings
since beginningless time. And the attachment to objects as having selfnature, Mahamati, takes place from not knowing that the external world
is no more than Self-Mind.

Further, Mahamati, there are two kinds of the sustaining power which
issues from the Tathagatas who are Arhats and Fully-Enlightened Ones;
and sustained by this power [the Bodhisattvas] would prostrate

themselves at their feet and ask them questions. What is this twofold
power that sustains the Bodhisattvas? The one is the power by which
they are sustained to go through the Samadhis and Samapattis; while the
other is the power whereby the Buddhas manifest themselves in person
before the Bodhisattvas and baptise them with their own hands. Then,
Mahamati, sustained by the power of the Buddhas, the BodhisattvaMahasattvas at their first stage will attain the Bodhisattva-Samadhi,
known as the Light of Mahayana, which belongs to the BodhisattvaMahasattvas. They will immediately see the Tathagatas, Arhats, FullyEnlightened Ones appearing before them personally, who come from all
the different abodes in the ten quarters of the world and who now facing
the Bodhisattvas will impart to them their sustaining power displayed
with the body, mouth, and words. Mahamati, as is the case with
Vajragarbha the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, and with other BodhisattvaMahasattvas who are in possession of similar character and virtue, so,
Mahamati, with the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas at the first stage, they will
attain the Tathagatas' power sustaining them in their Samadhis and
Samapattis. By virtue of their stock of merit accumulated for a hundred
thousand kalpas, they will, successively going up the stages and getting
thoroughly acquainted with what they should do and should not do,
finally reach the stage of Bodhisattvahood called Dharmamegha. Here
the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva finds himself seated on a throne in the
Lotus Palace, and surrounded by the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas of a
similar class; a tiara decorated and ornamented with all kinds of
precious stones is on his head, and his body1 shines brilliantly like the
moon in the yellowish gold colour of the Campaka flower. The Buddhas
now come from their worlds in the ten quarters, and with their lotus-like
hands, sprinkle the forehead of the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva who is
seated on the throne in the Lotus Palace; the Buddhas thus give him a
baptism personally by hand as when a great king invested with supreme
authority [baptises his crown-prince]. This Bodhisattva and these
Bodhisattvas are said to be sustained by the Buddhas' power, being
thus baptised by [their] hands. Mahamati, this is the twofold sustaining
power imparted to the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas, who, sustained by this
twofold sustaining power, personally come into the presence of all the
Buddhas. In no other way are the Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened

Ones to be interviewed.
Further, Mahamati, whatever Samadhis, psychic faculties, and teachings
are exhibited by the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas, they are sustained by the
twofold sustaining power of all the Buddhas. If, Mahamati, the
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas show their eloquence without the Buddhas'
sustaining power, the ignorant and simple-minded will also show their
eloquence. [But the latter do not.] Why? Because of the sustaining
power [on the one hand] and its absence [on the other]. Where the
Tathagatas enter with their sustaining power there will be music not only
in various musical instruments and vessels but also even in grass, shrubs,
trees, and mountains, Mahamati, yes, in towns indeed, palaces, houses,
and royal abodes. How much more those endowed with sentiency! The
mute, blind, and deaf will be cured of their deficiencies, Mahamati, and
will enjoy their emancipation. Such, Mahamati, is the great
extraordinary virtue of the sustaining power imparted by the Tathagatas.
Further, Mahamati said: Why is it, Bhagavan, that when the
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas are established in the Samadhis and
Samapattis, and when they are baptised at the most exalted stage, the
Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones, bestow their sustaining
power on them?
Replied the Bhagavan: It is in order to make them avoid the evil ones,
karma, and passions, to keep them away from the Dhyana and stage of
the Sravakahood, to have them realize the stage of Tathagatahood, and
to make them grow in the truth and experience already attained. For this
reason, Mahamati, the Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones
sustain with their power the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas. If they were not
thus sustained, Mahamati, they would fall into the way of thinking and
feeling as cherished by the wrong philosophers, Sravakas, or evil ones,
and would not attain the highest enlightenment. For this reason, the
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas are upheld by the Tathagatas, Arhats, FullyEnlightened Ones. Thus it is said:
165. The sustaining power is purified by the Buddhas' vows; in the

baptism, Samadhis, etc., from the first to the tenth [stage], [the
Bodhisattvas are in the embrace of the Buddhas].
At that time again Mahamati the Bodhisattva said thus to the Bhagavan:
The chain of origination as told by the Bhagavan depends on a cause
producing an effect, and that it is not a theory established on the
principle of a self-originating substance. The philosophers also proclaim
a causal origination when they say that all things rise conditioned by a
supreme spirit, Isvara, a personal soul, time, or atom. How is it that the
rise of all things is explained by the Bhagavan in another terminology
bearing on causation but in its meaning not different? Bhagavan, the
philosophers explain birth from being and non-being, while, according
to the Bhagavan, all things coming into existence from nothingness pass
away by causation,1 that is to say, the Bhagavan has Ignorance from
which there rises Mental Conformation until we reach Old Age and
Death. This teaching as explained by the Bhagavan is the doctrine of
no-causation and not that of causation. According to the Bhagavan,2
"that being so, this is"--if this is simultaneous conditionality and not
successive mutuality, it is not right. There, Bhagavan, the philosophers,
teaching excels, and not thine. Why? The cause assumed by the
philosophers is not dependent upon the chain of origination and
produces effects. But, Bhagavan, thy cause has reference to its effect
and the effect to its cause, and thus there is an interconnection of causal
links, and from this mutuality follows the fault of non-finality. When
people talk about, "That being so, this is. " there is a state of
causelessness.
Replied the Bhagavan: Not so, Mahamati, mine is not a causeless
theory of causation which results in an [endless] interconnection of
causes and conditions. I speak of "That being so, this is" because of my
seeing into the nature of the external world which is nothing but SelfMind and because of its unreality of grasped (object) and grasping
(subject). However, Mahamati, when people clinging to the notion of
grasped and grasping fail to understand the world as something seen of
Mind itself; and, Mahamati, by them the fault is committed as they
recognise the external world as real with its beings and non-beings, but

not by my theory of causation.
Further, Mahamati said: Bhagavan, is it not because of the reality of
words that all things are? If not for words, Bhagavan, there would be no
rising of things. Hence, Bhagavan, the existence of all things is by reason
of the reality of words.
Said the Bhagavan: Even when there are no [corresponding] objects
there are words, Mahamati; for instance, the hare's horns, the tortoise's
hair, a barren woman's child, etc. --they are not at all visible in the
world but the words are; Mahamati, they are neither entities nor
nonentities but expressed in words. If, Mahamati, you say that because
of the reality of words the objects are, this talk lacks in sense. Words
are not known in all the Buddha-lands; words, Mahamati, are an
artificial creation. In some Buddha-lands ideas are indicated by looking
steadily, in others by gestures, in still others by a frown, by the
movement of the eyes, by laughing, by yawning, or by the clearing of the
throat, or by recollection, or by trembling. Mahamati, for instance, in the
worlds of the Steady-Looking and in those of Exquisite Odours, and in
the Buddha-land of Samantabhadra the Tathagata, Arhat, FullyEnlightened One, the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas by steadily looking
without a wink attain the recognition of all things as unborn and also
various most excellent Samadhis. For this reason, Mahamati, the validity
of all things has nothing to do with the reality of words. It is observed,
Mahamati, even in this world that in the kingdom of such special beings
as ants, bees, etc., they carry on their work without words. Thus it is
said:
166. As space, the hare's horns, and a barren woman's child are nonentities except as expressed in words, so is this existence imagined.
167. When causes and conditions are in combination the ignorant
imagine the birth [of this world]; as they fail to understand this reason,
they wander about in the triple world which is their dwelling.
At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva again said this to the

Bhagavan: Bhagavan, where dost thou pronounce sound to be eternal?
The Bhagavan replied: According to error, Mahamati; since even to the
wise there is this error, only that they are free from perversion.
Mahamati, it is like the unwitted in the world who conceive a perverted
idea regarding a mirage, a firebrand wheel, a hair-net, the city of the
Gandharvas, Maya, a dream, a reflected image, and an Aksha-purusha,
but with the knowing it is not so, though it. does not mean that those
illusions do not appear to them. When, Mahamati, there is this error,
diversities of forms are seen, though to this error the idea of
impermanence is inapplicable. Why? Because it cannot be characterised
with the ideas of being and non-being. Again, Mahamati, how are the
ideas of being and non-being inapplicable to this error? Because all the
ignorant take in varieties of situations, like the waves of the ocean and
the waters of the Ganges which are not seen by the Pretas, but seen [by
others]. For this reason, Mahamati, the error-existence [or this world of
illusion] is not, but as this water is manifest to other people it is not a
non-existence either. Thus to the wise, the error is neither a perversion
nor a non-perversion. And for this reason, Mahamati, the error in itself
is characterised with permanency, having the nature of non-distinction
[as far as its own appearance is concerned]. Mahamati, being
discriminated as regards its diversified individual signs, the error is
perceived as differentiated. Thus the error, [as far as its own nature is
concerned], is characterised with permanency. Again, Mahamati, how
is the error to be considered reality? Mahamati, for this reason that as
regards this error the wise cherish neither a perverted knowledge nor an
unperverted knowledge. It is [such as it is and] not otherwise. In case,
Mahamati, the wise should cherish any thought whatever in this error, it
goes contrary to the reality attainable by noble wisdom. If there is
anything at all here it is the prattling of the ignorant, it is not the talk of
the wise.
Again, when the error is discriminated according to a perverted and an
unperverted view, it gives rise to two classes of family, one of which is
the family of the wise, and the other the family of the ignorant and
simple-minded. Now, Mahamati, the family of the wise is divisible into

three kinds, that is, the Sravakas, the Pratyekabuddhas, and the
Buddhas. Mahamati, how does the Sravakayana family rise from the
discrimination whereby the ignorant conceive the error? Mahamati,
there is the rise of the Sravakayana family where the attachment to the
notions of individuality and generality is kept up. This is the way,
Mahamati, this error gives rise to the Sravakayana family. Mahamati,
how does the Pratyekabuddhayana family rise as the error is
discriminated? Mahamati, when in this error the attachment to the
notions of individuality and generality leads one to a retirement from
social life, there rises the Pratyebuddhayana family. Mahamati, how is
there the rise of the Buddhayana family when this error is discriminated
by the intelligent? Mahamati, when the world is understood to be
nothing but Mind itself, the existence and non-existence of external
objects ceases to be discriminated, and there is the rise of the
Buddhayana family. Mahamati, this is the family, that is, what is meant
by the family.
Again, Mahamati, when the error is discriminated by the ignorant, there
is the manifestation of varieties of objects which calls forth the assertion
[on their part] that this is so and not otherwise; whence rises the family
of the transmigration vehicle. For this reason, Mahamati, the error is
discriminated by the ignorant as characterised by multitudinousness, and
this error is neither a reality nor an unreality. Thus, Mahamati, this error
being discriminated by the wise turns into Tathata (suchness) with them,
by virtue of a revulsion which takes place in them concerning the Citta,
Manas, ManoVijnana, false reasoning, habit-energy, the [three]
Svabhavas, and the [five] Dharmas. Thus, Mahamati, there is this
statement that Tathata is Mind emancipated. Mahamati, the meaning of
this statement is here thus clearly expressed by me, that is, by the
discarding of discrimination is meant the abandonment of all
discriminations. So much for this statement.
Mahamati said, Bhagavan, is the error an entity or not?
The Bhagavan replied: It is like Maya, Mahamati, the error has no
character in it making for attachment; if, Mahamati, the error had any

character in it making for attachment, no liberation would be possible
from the attachment to existence, the chain of origination would be
understood in the sense of creation as held by the philosophers.
Mahamati said: Bhagavan, if the error is like Maya, it will thereby be the
cause of another error.
The Bhagavan said: No, Mahamati, Maya cannot be the cause of the
error, because of its incapability of producing evils and faults; and thus,
Mahamati, Maya does not give rise to evil thoughts and faults. Again,
Mahamati, Maya has no discrimination of itself; it rises when invoked by
the magical charm of a certain person. It has in itself no habit-energy of
evil thoughts and faults that, issuing from self-discrimination, affect it.
[Therefore,] there are no faults in it. This is only due to the confused
view fondly cherished by the ignorant regarding Mind, and the wise
have nothing to do with it. So it is said:
168. The wise do not see [the(?)] error, nor is there any truth in its
midst; if truth is in its midst, [the(?)] error would be truth.
169. If there is the rising of individual forms (nimitta) apart from all
error, this will indeed be error, the defiled is like darkness.
Further, Mahamati, Maya is not an unreality, because it has the
appearance of reality; and all things have the nature of Maya.
Said Mahamati: Is it, Bhagavan, that all things are like Maya because
Maya is something imagined and clung to as having multitudinousness of
individual forms? Or is it due to the incorrect imagining of individual
forms? If all things have the likeness of Maya because Maya is
something imagined and clung to as having multitudinousness of
individual forms, then see, Bhagavan, things are not like Maya. Why?
Because forms are seen in the multitudinousness of individual signs not
without due causes. If they ever appear without due causes, assuming
the multitudinousness of individual signs and shapes, [then] they would
be like Maya. For this reason, Bhagavan, that things are like Maya is

not because they [i. e. all things and Maya] are both alike in being
imagined and clung to as having multitudinousness of individual signs.
Said the Bhagavan: It is not, Mahamati, that all things are Maya because
they are both alike in being imagined and clung to as having
multitudinousness of individual signs, but that all things are like Maya
because they are unreal and like a lightning-flash which is seen as
quickly disappearing. Mahamati, a lightning appears and disappears in
quick succession as is manifest to the ignorant; in the same way,
Mahamati, all things assume individuality and generality according to the
discrimination [of the Mind] itself. When the state of imagelessness2 is
recognised, objects which are imagined and clung to as in possession of
individual signs cease to assert themselves. Thus it is said:
170. Maya is not without reality, because it has something resembling it;
the reality of all things is talked of [in a similar manner]; they are unreal
like a lightning-flash [appearing and disappearing] quickly, and therefore
they are regarded as resembling Maya.

Further, Mahamati said: Now according to the Bhagavan, all things are
unborn and resemble Maya; but, Bhagavan, is there not the fault of
contradiction between the previous statement and the later one? It is
asserted by thee that that all things are unborn is due to their having the
nature of Maya.1
The Bhagavan replied: Mahamati, when all things are asserted to be
unborn because of their having the nature of Maya, there is no fault of
contradiction between my previous statement and my later one. Why?
Because birth is no-birth, when it is recognised that the world that
presents itself before us is no more than Mind itself; and as to all
external objects of which we state that they are or are not, they are to
be seen as non-existent and unborn; and thus, Mahamati, there is here
no fault of contradiction between my previous statement and my later
one. But, Mahamati, in order to cast aside the philosophers' thesis on
birth by causation, it is asserted that all things are like Maya and unborn.

Mahamati, the philosophers who are the gathering of the deluded, foster
the notion of deriving the birth of all things from that of being and nonbeing, and fail to regard it as caused by the attachment to the
multidinousness which rises from the discrimination [of the Mind] itself.
Mahamati, no fear rises in me [by making this statement].2 In this light,
Mahamati, the term "unborn" is to be understood.

Again, Mahamati, the teaching that all things exist is given in order to
admit transmigration, to check nihilism which says "Nothing is," and to
make my disciples accept the doctrine that asserts the reality of karma
in various forms and birth in the various worlds, for by admitting the
terminology of existence we admit transmigration. Mahamati, the
teaching that all things are characterised with the self-nature of Maya is
meant to make the ignorant and simple-minded cast aside the idea of
self-nature in anything; as they cherish the thoughts characterised with
error, as they do not clearly grasp the meaning of the world which is no
more than the Mind itself, they imagine and cling to causation, work,
birth, and individual signs; in order to check this I teach that all things
are characterised in their self-nature with the nature of Maya and a
dream. Attached to erroneous thoughts they contradict both themselves
and others by not seeing all things as they really and truly are.
Mahamati, to see all things as they really and truly are means to realize
that there is nothing to be seen but Mind itself. So it is said:
171. In the theory of no-birth, causation is not accepted [as is
maintained by the ignorant]; where existence is accepted transmigration
prevails; seeing that [all things] are like Maya, etc., one does not
discriminate individual signs.

Further, Mahamati, we will explain the characteristics of name-body,
the sentence-body, and the syllable-body; for when name-body,
sentence-body, and syllable-body are well understood, the
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas conformable to the signification of a sentence
and a syllable will quickly realize supreme enlightenment and thereby

awaken all beings to it. Mahamati, by name-body is meant the object
depending on which a name obtains, the body is this object; in another
sense the body means substance (sarira). Mahamati, this is the body of
a name. By the body of a sentence is meant what it signifies, the real
object, determining its sense definitely. In another sense, it completes its
reference. Mahamati, this is my teaching as regards the sentence-body.
By the syllable-body is meant that by which names and sentences are
indicated; it is a symbol, a sign; in another sense, it is something
indicated.
Again, Mahamati, the sentence (pada) -body means the completion of
the meaning expressed in the sentence. Again, Mahamati, a name (or a
letter, nama) means each separate letter distinguished as to its selfnature from a to ha. Again, Mahamati, a syllable (vyanjana) is short,
long, or lengthy. Again, Mahamati, regarding the sentence (pada) -body
the idea of it is obtained from the foot-prints left on the road by
elephants, horses, people, deer, cattle, cows, buffalos, goats, rams, etc.
Again, Mahamati, names (nama) and syllables (vyanjana) belong to the
four Skandhas which being formless are indicated by names; thus are
names made. By means of the differently characterised names there are
syllables (vyanjana); thus are syllables made. This, Mahamati, is the
meaning of the body of a name (nama), a sentence (pada), and a
syllable (vyanjana). You should endeavour to have a thorough
understanding of these terms. It is thus said:
172. Because of the distinction between nama, pada, and vyanjana, the
ignorant, the dull-witted, stick to them like the elephant in deep mud.

Further, Mahamati, in the time to come, those wrong-headed ones who
are inclined to false speculations owing to their deficiency of knowledge
concerning truth and cause may be asked by the wise, regarding that
which is liberated from the dualistic conceptions of things such as
oneness and otherness, bothness and not-bothness; and thus asked,
they may answer, saying, "It is no question; it is not at all properly put-that is to say, the question: Are form, etc. and transiency to be

considered one or different?"
In the same way, Nirvana and the Skandhas, indices and indicated,
qualities and qualified, realities and the elements, seen and seeing, dust
and atoms, knowledge and the Yogins--[are these to be considered one
or different?] Such questions concerning the various aspects of
existence lead successively from one thing to another without end, and
those who are asked about these unexplainable questions would declare
that they were put aside by the Bhagavan as impossible to answer.
However, these deluded people are unable to realize [the meaning of]
what they heard [from the Buddha] because of their deficiency of
knowledge. The Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones do not
explain these things to all beings because of their wish to keep the latter
from the fear-inspiring phrases.
Mahamati, these inexplicables (vyahriani) are not taken up for
consideration by the Tathagatas in order to keep the philosophers away
from their wrong views and theories. Mahamati, the philosophers may
declare thus: what life is that is the body, or life is one thing, body is
another. In these they make inexplicable statements. Mahamati, entirely
bewildered by the idea of a creator, the philosophers make an
inexplicable statement, but that is not found in my teaching. In my
teaching, Mahamati, discrimination does not take place because I teach
to stand above grasped and grasping. How could there be any setting
aside here? But, Mahamati, to those who are addicted to grasped and
grasping, as they do not have a thorough understanding of the world
which is no more than what is seen of the Mind itself, there is something
to be set aside [as inexplicable]. Mahamati, the Tathagatas, Arhats,
Fully-Enlightened Ones teach the Dharma to all beings by means of the
four forms of questioning and answering. As to the propositions that are
set aside [as inexplicable], Mahamati, they are made use of by me on
some other occasions for those whose senses are not yet fully matured;
but for those of matured senses there is nothing to set aside.

Further, Mahamati, all things being devoid of doing and doer are

unborn; as there is no doer, all things are therefore said to be unborn.
Mahamati, all things are without self-nature. Why? Because, Mahamati,
when they are examined by self-knowledge, there are no such signs
obtainable which characterise them with individuality and generality;
therefore, all things are said to have no self-nature. Again, Mahamati, in
all things there is no taking birth, no going-out. Why? Because,
Mahamati, the signs of individuality and generality are seen as existing
and yet they are non-existent; they are seen as going out, and yet they
do not go out. For this reason, Mahamati, all things are neither taking
birth, nor are they going out. Again, Mahamati, all things are never
annihilated. Why? For this reason that the individual signs that make up
the self-nature of things are nonexistent, and all things are beyond reach.
Therefore, all things are said never to be annihilated. Again, Mahamati,
all things are not eternal. Why? Because the rising of individual signs is
characterised with non-eternality. Therefore, all things are said not to be
eternal. Again, Mahamati, all things are eternal. Why? Because the
rising of individual signs is no-rising and is non-existent; and all things
are eternal because of their non-eternality. Therefore, Mahamati, all
things are said to be eternal. Thus it is said:
173. 1The four kinds of explanation are: direct statement, questioning,
discernment, and setting aside; whereby the philosophers are kept
away.
174. The Sankha and the Vaiseshika philosophers teach birth from a
being or from a non-being; all that are proclaimed by them are the
inexplicables.
175. When the self-nature [of all things] is examined by knowledge, it is
beyond reach; therefore, they are without self-nature and unattainable.

At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva again said this to the
Bhagavan: Pray tell me, Bhagavan, regarding the Stream-entered and
their special attainment which characterises the state of the Streamentered, whereby I and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas thoroughly

becoming acquainted with the Stream-entered and their special
attainment characterising the state of the Stream-entered, will proceed
to know the means and conduct which characterises the state of the
Once-returning, Never-returning, and Arhatship; and they will then
explain the Dharma to all beings in this manner. Having understood the
twofold form of egolessness and having cleansed themselves of the
twofold hindrance, they will by degrees go through the stages of
Bodhisattvahood each of which has its own characteristics, and attaining
Tathagatahood whose spiritual realm is beyond conceivability, they will
be like a multicoloured gem and will accomplish what is good for the
lives of all beings, providing them with every teaching, condition,
deportment, body, and enjoyment.
Replied the Bhagavan: Listen well Mahamati, and take well to heart; I
will tell you.
Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva answering him said: Very well,
Bhagavan.
The Bhagavan then said this: Mahamati, in the fruit attained by the
Sravakas, three kinds are distinguishable. What are the three? They are
graded, Mahamati, low, middle, and the highest. The low ones will be
reborn seven times when their existence will come to an end; the
middling will attain Nirvana in three or five births; the highest will attain
Nirvana in this birth. Mahamati, for these three classes [of the Streamentered] there are three kinds of knots: weak, middling, and strong.
What are these three knots, Mahamati? They are: (1) the view of an
individual personality, (2) doubt, and (3) the holding-on to moral
practices. Mahamati, when all these three knots arc in succession
promoted to the higher stage then1 will be the attainment of Arhatship.
Mahamati, there are two kinds of the view of an individual personality;
that is, (1) the inborn one and (2) the one due to the false imagination; it
is like [the relation between] the relativity view and the false imagination
[of the three] Svabhavas. For instance, Mahamati, depending on the
relativity view of things there arise varieties of attachments to the false

imagination. But this [existence] is neither a being, nor a non-being, nor
a being-and-non-being; it is not a reality because of the false
imagination, and, being discriminated by the ignorant, assumes varieties
of individual signs to which they are strongly attached just as the deer
does to a mirage. Mahamati, this is the view of an individual personality
falsely imagined by the Stream-entered, which has been accumulated
for a long time by their ignorance and attachment. This is destroyed
when the egolessness of a person is attained by which the clinging
ceases.
Mahamati, the inborn view of an individual personality as held by the
Stream-entered [is destroyed in this way]. When this body which
belongs equally to each of us is considered, it is perceived that it
consists of form and the other four Skandhas, that form takes its rise
from the elements and their belongings, that the elements are mutually
conditioning, and that hence there is no aggregate known as form.
When thus the Stream-entered realize that the idea of being and nonbeing is a partial view [of truth], the view of individual personality is
destroyed. When the view of individual personality is thus destroyed,
covetousness will never assert itself. This, Mahamati, is what
characterises the view of individual personality.
Again, Mahamati, as regards the nature of doubt, when the Dharma is
attained, and realized, and thoroughly understood as to its
characteristics, and when the twofold view of individual personality is
destroyed as previously described, no doubt is cherished in the teaching
[of the Buddhas]. And there is no thought [in the minds of the Streamentered] to follow the lead of any other teacher because of [the
difference between] purity and non-purity. This,. Mahamati, is what is
meant by doubt [discarded] by the Stream-entered.
Again, Mahamati, how is it that the Stream-entered do not hold
themselves to the morality? They do not because they clearly see into
the nature of suffering wherever they may be reborn. [What is meant
by] the holding? Mahamati, that the ignorant and simple-minded
observe the rules of morality, piety, and penance, is because they desire

thereby to attain worldly enjoyments and happinesses; they cherish the
hope of being born in agreeable conditions. And [the Stream-entered]
do not hold [to the rules of morality], for their thoughts are turning only
towards the exalted state of self-realization, and the reason why they
devote themselves to the details of morality is that they wish to master
such truths as are in conformity with non-discrimination and undefiled
outflows. This, Mahamati, is the way in which the Stream-entered Ones
hold to morality and piety. Mahamati, by thus breaking up the three
knots the Stream-entered will discard covetousness, anger, and folly.
Mahamati said: Many kinds of covetousness are taught by the
Bhagavan; which one of them is to be cast aside?
The Bhagavan replied: The world where love grows, i. e., the desire for
sexual embrace, showing itself in beating, slapping, suggesting, kissing,
embracing, smelling, looking-sidewise, or gazing may give one
momentary pleasures but is productive of future grief. [With the Streamentered] there is no greed for such. Why? Because they are abiding in
the bliss of the Samadhi which they have attained. Hence this casting
aside, but not of the desire for Nirvana.
Again, Mahamati, what is the fruit of the Once-returning? There is once
in them the discrimination of forms, signs, and appearances; but as they
learn not to view individual objects under the aspect of qualified and
qualifying, and as they know well what marks the attainment of the
Dhyana, they once come back into the world, and putting an end to
suffering, realize Nirvana. Hence the appellation "Once-returning. "
Again, Mahamati, what is meant by Never-returning? It means that
while there is yet the viewing of individual objects as characterised by
being and non-being in the past, present, and future, the discrimination
does not return with its errors and faults, the dormant passions do not
assert themselves, and the knots are completely cut off never to return.
Hence the appellation "Never-returning."
Again, Mahamati, the Arhat is the one who has attained the Dhyanas,

Samadhis, emancipations, powers, psychic faculties, and with whom
there are no more passions, sufferings, and discriminations. Hence the
appellation "Arhat."
Mahamati said: Now, the Bhagavan declares that there are three kinds
of Arhats: to which one of the three is this term "Arhat" to be applied?
To one who makes straightway for the path of cessation? Or to one
who neglects all his accumulated stock of merit for the sake of his vow
to enlighten others? Or to one who is a form of the Transformation
[Buddha]?
Replied the Bhagavan: Mahamati, [the term "Arhat"] applies to the
Sravaka who makes straightway for the path of cessation, and to no
others. Mahamati, as for the others, they are those who have finished
practising the deeds of a Bodhisattva; they are forms of the
Transformation Buddha. With skilful means born of their fundamental
and original vows, they manifest themselves among the multitudes in
order to adorn the assemblages of the Buddhas. Mahamati, here in
these paths and abodes of existence they give out varieties of teachings
which are based on discrimination; that is to say, as they are above such
things as the attainment of the fruit, the Dhyanas, the Dhyana-practisers,
or subjects for meditation, and as they know that this world is no more
than what is seen of the Mind itself, they discourse on the fruit attained
[for the sake of all beings]. Further, Mahamati, if the Stream-entered
should think."These are the fetters, but I am disengaged from them, "
they commit a double fault: they still hold to the vices of the ego, and
they have not freed themselves from the fetters.
Further, Mahamati, in order to go beyond the Dhyanas, the
immeasurables, and the formless world, the signs of this visible world
which is Mind itself should be discarded. The Samapatti leading to the
extinction of thought and sensation does not enable one to transcend the
world of particulars, for there is nothing but Mind. So it is said:
176. The Dhyanas, the immeasurables, the formless, the Samadhis, and
the complete extinction of thought (nirodha)--these do not exist where

the Mind alone is.
177. The fruit of the Stream-entered, and that of the Once-returning,
and that of the Never-returning, and Arhatship--these are the
bewildered states of mind.
178. The Dhyana-practiser, the Dhyana, the subject for it, the
destruction, the seeing of the truth, --these are no more than
discriminations; when this is recognised there is emancipation.

Further, Mahamati, there are two kinds of intellect: the intellect as an
examining function, and the intellect which functions in connection with
the attachment to ideas of discrimination. As for the intellect that
examines, Mahamati, it is that act of intellect which examines into the
self-nature of things, finding it to be devoid of the four propositions, and
unattainable. This is known as the intellect that examines. What is meant
by [being devoid of] the four propositions? It means to be devoid of
oneness and otherness, bothness and not-bothness, being and nonbeing, eternity and non-eternity. These are called the four propositions.
Mahamati, train yourself to examine carefully all things as regards these
four propositions. What, Mahamati, is the intellect which functions in
connection with the attachment to ideas of discrimination? It is the
intellect with which the Mind is discriminated and the ideas arising
therefrom are adhered to [as real]; and this adherence gives rise to the
conceptions of warmth, fluidity, motility, and solidity as characterising
the gross elements; while the tenacious holding to proposition, reason,
definition, and illustration, leads to the assertion of a non-entity [as
entity]. This is called the intellect that functions in connection with the
attachment to ideas of discrimination.
This, Mahamati, is what characterises the two kinds of intellect, in
accordance with which the Bodhisattvas, thoroughly mastering the signs
of egolessness of persons and things, and, by means of knowledge of
imagelessness, becoming conversant with the stage of examination and
practice, will attain the first stage [of Bodhisattvahood] and acquire one

hundred Dhyanas. Attaining the excellent Samadhis, they will see one
hundred Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, they will enter into one hundred
kalpas that were prior to the present and also into those that will follow
the present, they will illuminate one hundred Buddha-lands, and,
illuminating one hundred Buddha-lands, they will understand the signs
belonging to the higher stages; and by virtue of the most exalted vows
they will manifest wonderful powers, they will be baptised by [the
Buddhas] when they reach the stage of Dharmamegha (law-cloud); and
realizing the inmost realm of the Tathagatas, they will be provided with
things which are closely connected with the ten inexhaustible vows; and,
in order to bring all beings into maturity, they will shine out in various
forms with the rays of transformation; they will be quite absorbed in the
bliss of self-realization.

Further, Mahamati, the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas are to be well
acquainted with the primary and the secondary elements. How do the
Bodhisattvas know the primary and the secondary elements? Mahamati,
the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas are to know this that the truth is that the
primary elements have never come into existence, and that, Mahamati,
these elements are unborn. Thus understood, there is nothing in the
world but what is discriminated [by our imagination]. When it is
recognised that the visible world is no more than Mind itself, external
objects cease to be realities, and there is nothing but what is
discriminated by the mind and perceived [as external]. That is to say, let
it be understood that the triple world has nothing to do with the primary
and the secondary elements, that it is removed from the four
propositions and philosophical systems, that it has nothing to do with a
personal ego and what belongs to it; and that it establishes itself in the
abode of real reality, where it is seen in its own form, i. e. in its unborn
state.
Mahamati, what is meant by the elements derived from the primary
elements? The element discriminated as vascidity produces the realm of
water, inner and outer; the element discriminated as energy produces
the realm of fire, inner and outer; the element discriminated as motility

produces the realm of air, inner and outer; the element discriminated as
divisibility of form gives birth to the realm of earth together with space,
inner and outer. Because of the attachment to the incorrect truths there
is the aggregation of the five Skandhas giving rise to the elements
primary and secondary.
Again, Mahamati, the Vijnana has its cause in our attachment to and the
desire for the multitudinousness of statements and objective fields; and it
continues to evolve in another path of existence. Mahamati, the
secondary elements such as earth, etc., [are said] to have their cause in
the primary elements which, however, are non-existent. Because,
Mahamati, of things endowed with being, characteristics, marks,
perceivableness, abode, and work, one can say that they are born of
the combination of various effect-producing [elements]; but not of things
which are devoid of characteristic marks. For this reason, Mahamati,
the elements primary and secondary are the discriminations of the
philosophers and not mine.

Further, Mahamati, I will explain what characterises the self-nature of
the Skandhas. Mahamati, what are the five Skandhas? They are form,
sensation, thought, conformation, and consciousness. Mahamati, four of
these have no material forms--sensation, thought, conformation, and
consciousness. Form, Mahamati, belongs to what is made of the four
primary elements, and these elements differ from one another in their
individual signs. But the four Skandhas that are without form cannot be
reckoned as four, they are like space. For instance, Mahamati, space
cannot be numbered, and it is due to our discrimination that it is
designated as such; in the same way, Mahamati, the Skandhas that are
beyond calculability as they have no number-marks, are not to be
predicated as existing and non-existing, and are beyond the four
propositions; but to the ignorant they are described as subject to
numeration, but not so to the wise.
Again, Mahamati, by the wise the five Skandhas are regarded as
thought-constructions, devoid of [dualisties such as] otherness and not-

otherness; for they are like varieties of forms and objects in a vision, like
images and persons in a dream. As they have no better substance for
their support, and as they obstruct the passage of noble wisdom, there
is what is known as the Skandha-discrimination. This, Mahamati, is
what characterises the self-nature of the Skandhas. This discrimination
must be discarded by you, and having discarded this, you should
declare the truth of solitude. Keeping back the views held by the
philosophers, the truth of solitude is to be announced in all the Buddhaassemblies, Mahamati, and thereby the teaching of the egolessness of
things is purified and you will enter upon the stage of Far-going
(duramgama). Entering upon the stage of Duramgama you will become
the master of many Samadhis, and, attaining the will-body you will
realize the Samadhi known as Mayopama (Maya-like). Thoroughly
conversant with the powers, psychic faculties and self-control, you will
be the supporter of all beings like the earth. Mahamati, as the great
earth is the supporter of all beings, so is the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva the
supporter of all beings.

Further, Mahamati, there are four kinds of Nirvana. What are the four?
They are: (1) the Nirvana which is attained when the self-nature of all
things is seen as nonentity; (2) the Nirvana which is attained when
varieties of individual marks characterising all things are seen as nonentities; (3) the Nirvana which is attained when there is the recognition
of the non-existence of a being endowed with its own specific attributes;
and (4) the Nirvana which is attained when there takes place the
severance of the bondage conditioning the continuation of individuality
and generality of the Skandhas. Mahamati, these four views of Nirvana
belong to the philosophers and are not my teaching. According to my
teaching, Mahamati, the getting rid of the discriminating ManoVijnana-this is said to be Nirvana.
Mahamati said: Does not the Bhagavan establish eight Vijnanas?
The Bhagavan replied: I do, Mahamati.

Mahamati said: If eight Vijnanas are established, why do you refer to
the getting-rid of the ManoVijnana and not of the seven [other]
Vijnanas [as well]?
The Bhagavan said: With the ManoVijnana as cause and supporter,
Mahamati, there rise the seven Vijnanas. Again, Mahamati, the
ManoVijnana is kept functioning, as it discerns a world of objects and
becomes attached to it, and by means of manifold habit-energy [or
memory] it nourishes the alayaVijnana. The Manas is evolved along
with the notion of an ego and its belongings, to which it clings and on
which it reflects. It has no body of its own, nor its own marks; the
alayaVijnana is its cause and support. Because the world which is the
Mind itself is imagined real and attached to as such, the whole psychic
system evolves mutually conditioning. Like the waves of the ocean,
Mahamati, the world which is the mind-manifested, is stirred up by the
wind of objectivity, it evolves and dissolves. Thus, Mahamati, when the
ManoVijnana is got rid of, the seven Vijnanas are also got rid of. So it
is said:
179. I enter not into Nirvana by means of being, of work, of individual
signs; I enter into Nirvana when the Vijnana which is caused by
discrimination ceases.
180. With it [i. e. the ManoVijnana] for its cause and support, the
Manas secures its use; the Vijnana causes the Citta to function, and is
supported [by it].
181. Like a great flood where no waves are stirred because of its being
dried up, the Vijnana [-system] in its various forms ceases to work
when there is the annihilation [of the ManoVijnana].

Further, Mahamati, I will tell you about the various features of the false
imagination (parikalpita); and when you and the BodhisattvaMahasattvas are well acquainted with each of them in its specific form,
you will get away from discrimination; and seeing well and knowing the

way of inner realization by noble wisdom and also the ways of
speculation by the philosophers, you will cast off discriminations such as
grasped and grasping, and will not be induced to discriminate in respect
to the multiple aspects of relativity-knowledge (paratantra), as well as
the forms of the false imagination. What are the various features of the
false imagination, Mahamati? They are the discriminations as regards (1)
words (abhilapa), (2) meaning, (3) individual marks, (4) property, (5)
self-nature, (6) cause, (7) philosophical views, (8) reasoning, (9) birth,
(10) no-birth, (11) dependence, and (12) bondage and emancipation.
These, Mahamati, are the various features of the false imagination.
Now, Mahamati, what is the discrimination of words? That is the
becoming attached to various sweet voices and singing--this is the
discrimination as regards words.
What is the discrimination of meaning? It is the discrimination by which
one imagines that words rise depending on whatever subjects they
express, and which subjects one regards as self-existent and belonging
to the realization of noble wisdom.
What is the discrimination of individual marks? It is to imagine in
whatever is denoted by words the multitudinousness of individual marks
which are like a mirage, and, clinging tenaciously to them, to
discriminate all things according to these categories: warmth, fluidity,
motility, and solidity.
What is the discrimination of property? It is to desire a state of wealth
such as gold, silver, and various precious stones.
What is the discrimination of self-nature? It is to make discrimination
according to the imaginary views of the philosophers in reference to the
self-nature of all things which they stoutly maintain, saying, "This is just
it, and there is no other."
What is the discrimination of cause? That is, to distinguish the notion of
causation in reference to being and non-being and to imagine that there

are cause-signs--this is the discrimination of cause.
What is the discrimination of philosophical views? That means getting
attached to the philosophers' wrong views and discriminations
concerning such notions as being and non-being, oneness and
otherness, bothness and not-bothness.
What is the discrimination of reasoning? It means the teaching whose
reasoning is based on the grasping of the notion of an ego-substance
and what belongs to it.
What is the discrimination of birth? It means getting attached to the
notion that things come into existence and go out of it according to
causation.
What is the discrimination of no-birth? It is to discriminate that all things
are from the beginning unborn, that the causeless substances which
were not, come into existence by reason of causation.
What is the discrimination of dependence? It means the mutual
dependence of gold and the filament [which is made of gold].
What is the discrimination of bondage and emancipation? It is like
imagining that there is something bound because of something binding as
in the case of a man who by the help of a cord ties a knot or loosens it.
These, Mahamati, are the various features of the false imagination, to
which all the ignorant and simple-minded ones cling, imagining that
things are or are not. Those attached to the notion of relativity are
attached to the notion of multitudinousness of things rising from the false
imagination. It is like seeing varieties of objects depending on Maya, but
these varieties thus revealing themselves are discriminated by the
ignorant as something other than Maya itself according to their way of
thinking. Now, Mahamati, Maya and varieties of objects are neither
different nor one. If they were different, varieties of objects would not
have Maya for their cause. If Maya were one with varieties of objects,

there would be no distinction between the two, but as there is the
distinction these two--Maya and varieties of objects--are neither one
nor different. For this reason you and the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas
should never give yourselves up to the notion of being and non-being.

So it is said:
182. The Citta is bound up with the objective world; the intellect's
function is to speculate; and in the excellent state of imagelessness there
is the evolving of transcendental wisdom (prajna).
183. According to the false imagination, [self-substance] is, but from the
point of view of relativity (paratantra) it is not; owing to perversion,
what is discriminated is grasped [as real]; in the relativity there is no
discrimination.
184. Multitudinousness of differentiations is imagined [as real by the
ignorant], but being like Maya they obtain not; varieties of individual
forms are discriminated as such, but they [really] do not obtain.
185. [To imagine] individual forms is wrong, it puts one in bondage;
they are born of Mind due to the false imagination of the ignorant; based
on the relativity they are discriminated.
186. The existence thus subjected to discrimination is no other than its
relativity aspect; the false imagination is of various forms; based on the
relativity, discrimination is carried on.
187. Conventional truth (samvriti) and ultimate truth (paramartha)--if
there be a third, non-entity is its cause; the false imagination belongs to
the conventional; when it is cut asunder, there is the realm of the wise.
188. As to the Yogins there is one reality which reveals itself as
multiplicity and yet there is no multiplicity in it; so is the nature of the
false imagination.

189. As by the dim-eyed a variety of objects is seen and imagined while
the dimness itself is neither a form (rupa) nor a no-form (arupa), so is
the relativity [discriminated] by the unknowing ones.
190. As is pure gold, water free from dirt, the sky without a cloud, so is
[the Mind] pure when detached1 from the false imagination.
191. Falsely-imagined existence is not, but from the relativity point of
view it is, assertion and refutation are destroyed when one is freed from
the imagination.
192. If the relativity-aspect of existence is, while the imagination is not,
this means that there is a being apart from being and that a being is born
of a non-being.
193. Depending on the false imagination there obtains the relativityaspect of existence; from the conjunction of form and name there rises
false imagination.
194. False imagination can never be perfect knowledge (nishpanna), it
is not productive of anything else [but itself]; then one knows what is
meant by ultimate truth whose self-nature is purity.
195. There are ten kinds2 of false imagination and six kinds of relativity;
in the knowledge of Tathata innerly attained there is no differentiation.
196. Truth consists in [knowing] the five Dharmas and also the three
Svabhavas; when the Yogin thus comprehends [the truth], he does not
transgress Tathata.
197. According to the form of relativity, there are those names that
belong to false imagination; and the various aspects of false imagination
arise from relativity.

198. When well pondered with intelligence (buddhi) there is neither
relativity nor false imagination; where perfect knowledge is, there is
nothing [dualistically] existent; for how with intelligence can
discrimination take place?
199. Where perfect knowledge is, the existent cannot be qualified with
being and non-being; in what cannot be qualified with being and nonbeing, how can there be these two Svabhavas?
200. Because of false imagination, the two Svabhavas are established;
where there is false imagination multitudinousness of things is
recognised, which being purified the [spiritual] condition of the wise
obtains.
201. Where there is false imagination there is multitudinousness of
objects, which are discriminated under the aspect of relativity; if
otherwise discriminated, one becomes attached to the teachings of the
philosophers.
202. What is imagined being subjected to further imagination, there are
various views from which rises the doctrine of causal origination; when
the dualistic discrimination is got rid of, there indeed is perfect
knowledge.1
Further, Mahamati said: Pray tell me, Bhagavan, about the one vehicle
that characterises the inner realization of noble wisdom, whereby,
Bhagavan, I and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas, becoming conversant
with the one vehicle which marks the inner attainment of noble wisdom,
may be established without depending on anybody else in the teaching
of the Buddha.
Said the Bhagavan: Then, Mahamati, listen well and reflect within
yourself as I tell you.
Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said, Yes, I will, Bhagavan; and
gave ear to the Bhagavan.

Thereupon the Bhagavan said: In accordance with the authoritative
teachings in which there are no discriminations, Mahamati, let the
Bodhisattva-Mahasattva retire by himself to a quiet secluded place,
where he may reflect within himself, not relying on anybody else, but by
means of his own inner intelligence, in order to discard erroneous views
and discriminations, make successive advances and exert himself to
finally enter upon the stage of Tathagatahood. This, Mahamati, is the
characteristic feature of the inner realization to be gained by means of
noble wisdom.
What characterizes the way of the one vehicle? I call it the one vehicle
because thereby one recognizes and realizes the path leading to the one
vehicle. How is this path of the one vehicle to be recognized and
realized? The recognition of the one vehicle is obtained when there is no
rising of discrimination by doing away with the notion of grasped and
grasping and by abiding in the reality of suchness (yathabhuta).
Mahamati, this recognition of the one vehicle, except by the Tathagata
himself, has never been obtained before by anybody else--the
philosophers, Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, Brahmans, etc. For this
reason, Mahamati, this is known as the one vehicle.
Mahamati said: For what reason is it that the Bhagavan speaks of the
triple vehicle and not of the one vehicle?
The Bhagavan replied: Because there is no teaching whereby the
Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas can realize Nirvana by themselves, I do
not speak of the one vehicle. Thus, Mahamati, the Sravakas and
Pratyekabuddhas are disciplined, segregated, and trained in meditation
according to the discourse of the Tathagata, whereby they are led to
emancipation and not by themselves.

Further, Mahamati, as they have not yet destroyed the habit-energy
(memory) of karma and the hindrance of knowledge, all the Sravakas
and Pratyekabuddhas are unable to realize the egolessness of things and

have not attained the inconceivable transformation-death, I preach to
the Sravakas [and Pratyekabuddhas] the triple vehicle and not the one
vehicle. When, Mahamati, destroying all the evil habit-energy, they
realize the egolessness of things, they who are now free from the evil
habit-energy will not be intoxicated by the Samadhis and will be
awakened into the realm of no-evil-outflows. Now being taken into a
super-world which is the realm of no-evil-outflows, they will gather up
all the material for the attainment of the Dharmakaya which is of
severeign power and beyond conception. So it is said:
203. The Deva vehicle, the Brahma vehicle, the Sravaka vehicle, the
Pratyekabuddha vehicle, and the Tathagata vehicle, of these I speak.
204. So long as there is a mind making conscious efforts, there can be
no culmination as regards the various vehicles; when a revulsion takes
place in the mind, there is neither a vehicle nor one who rides in it.
205. There is really no establishment of various vehicles, and so I speak
of the one vehicle; but in order to carry the ignorant I talk of a variety of
vehicles.

206. There are three emancipations, and in all things there is no egosubstance; knowledge and passions are of the same nature, when [one
is] emancipated they are discarded.
207. Like a piece of wood floating on the waves of the ocean, the
Sravaka obsessed with individual marks is driven along [the stream of
existence].
208. Though disengaged from the actively-functioning passions, they
[the Sravakas] are still bound up with the habit-energy of the passions;
intoxicated with the liquor of the Samadhi, they still have their abode in
the realm of outflows.
209. In this there is no course of finality, nor retrogression either; [losing

himself] in the attainment of the Samadhi-body, he is not at all
awakened even to the end of kalpas.
210. Like unto the drunkard who, being awakened from his
intoxication, regains his intelligence, [the Sravakas] will have the
realization of the Buddha's truth, which is his own body.
(End of Chapter 2)





Chapter 3: On Impermanency

At that time again the Bhagavan said this to Mahamati the BodhisattvaMahasattva: I will tell you, Mahamati, about the various forms of the
will-body; listen well and reflect well within yourself. I will tell you.
Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said; I will, Bhagavan, and gave
ear to the Bhagavan.
The Bhagavan then said this: There are three kinds of will-body,
Mahamati. What are the three? They are: (1) the will-body obtained in
the enjoyment of the Samadhi; (2) the will-body obtained by
recognizing the self-nature of the Dharma; and (3) the will-body which
is assumed [by a Bodhisattva according to] the class of beings [to be
saved] and which perfects and achieves [without a thought of its own
achievement]. By realizing the higher stages successively after the first is
attained, the Yogin will experience them [all].
Now, Mahamati, what is the will-body attained in the enjoyment of the
Samadhi? It is this: when [the Yogin] in the third, fourth, fifth stages
removes the various discriminations going on in his mind and is at rest,1
the waves of consciousness are no more stirred in the Mind-ocean and
the Vijnana functions are quieted, the bliss of which is enjoyed by him;
and when he thus recognizes the non-existence of the external world,
which is no more than his own mind, he is said to have the will-body.2
What is the will-body obtained by recognizing the self-nature of the
Dharma? When [the Yogin] of the eighth stage has a thoroughgoing
penetration into the nature of things which is like Maya and not image-

producing, he experiences a revulsion at the seat of consciousness and
obtains the Samadhi known as Maya-like and other Samadhis. By
entering upon the Samadhis he gains a body which exhibits various
powers of self-mastery and supernatural activity, which moves
according to his wish as quickly as a flower opens up, which resembles
Maya, a dream, and a reflected image, and which is not a product of
the elements but has something analogous to what is produced of the
elements, which is furnished with all the differences appertaining to the
world of forms and yet is able to follow up all the assemblages in the
Buddha-lands. This is the body which has a thoroughgoing knowledge
of the self-nature of the Dharma and for this reason is called will-body.
Now what is the will-body which is born in accordance with the class
and which perfects and achieves? When [the Yogin] is thoroughly
conversant with all the characteristics of self-realisation and its bliss
which pervades the teachings of the Buddha, he is said to have the body
which is will-made, born with [the class], perfecting and achieving.
Mahamati, you should exert yourself in order to have a thoroughly
penetrating knowledge of these three marks of the will-body. So it is
said:
1. My Mahayana is neither a vehicle, nor a sound, nor words; it is
neither the truth, nor emancipation, nor the realm of imagelessness.
2. Yet the Mahayana is a vehicle on which the Samadhis are carried
leading to various creative activities; the several forms of the will-body
are adorned with the flowers of the sovereign will.

At that time again Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said this to the
Bhagavan: The five immediacies are preached by the Bhagavan; and
what are these five, Bhagavan, which being committed by a son or a
daughter of a good family cause them to fall into the Avici hell?
The Bhagavan replied: Then, Mahamati, listen well and reflect, for I will
tell you.

Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said; Certainly, Bhagavan, and
gave ear to the Bhagavan.
The Bhagavan said thus to him: What are the five immediacies? They
are: (1) the murdering of the mother, (2) of the father, (3) of the Arhat,
(4) the breaking-up of the Brotherhood, and (5) causing the body of the
Tathagata to bleed from malice.
Now what is meant by the mother of all beings? It is desire which is
procreative, going together with joy and anger and upholding all with
motherliness. Ignorance representing fatherhood brings about one's
rebirth in the six villages of the sense-world. When there takes place a
complete destruction of both roots, fatherhood and motherhood, it is
said that mother and father are murdered. When there is a complete
extermination of the subordinate group of passions such as anger, etc.,
which are like an enemy, a venomous rat, the murdering of the Arhat is
said to take place. What is meant by the breaking-up of the
Brotherhood? When there is a complete fundamental breaking-up of the
combination of the Skandhas whose characteristic mark is a state of
mutual dependence among dissimilarities, it is said that the Brotherhood
is split up. Mahamati, when the body of the eight Vijnanas, which
erroneously recognizes individuality and generality as being outside the
Mind--which is seen [by the ignorant] in the form of an external world-is completely extirpated by means of faulty discriminations, that is, by
means of the triple emancipation and the non-outflows, and when thus
the faulty mentality of the Vijnana-Buddha is made to bleed, it is known
as an immediacy-deed. These,
Mahamati, are the five inner immediacies, and when they are
experienced by a son or a daughter of a good family, there is an
immediacy-deed of realisation as regards the Dharma.
Further, Mahamati, there are five external immediacies which I will point
out to you, in order that you and other Bodhisattvas in the future may
thereby be saved from ignorance. What are these five? They are those

immediacies which are described in the canonical texts, and those who
commit these crimes can never experience any one of these
manifestations, except those Transformation [-Buddhas] who are
sustained by the power [of the Tathagatas] and have already attained a
realisation. The Sravakas of transformation, Mahamati, who are
sustained by the sustaining power either of the Bodhisattvas or
Tathagatas, may see somebody else practising deeds of wickedness,
and they will repeatedly make great efforts to turn him away from his
wickness and faulty views, and to make him realise the non-reality of
wickedness and faulty views by laying down his burden. This is the way
I demonstrate facts of the transformation, the sustaining power, and the
realisation. Mahamati, there is, however, no realisation for those who
are sheer offenders of the immediacies, except when they come to the
recognition of the truth that an external world is nothing but1 the Mind
itself, seeing that body, property, and abiding place are discriminations,
and that the notion of an ego and its belongings are to be kept away; or,
when they are released from the fault of self-discrimination by
encountering a good friend at some time or other, or at any time, and
being born in some other path of existence. So it is said:
3. Desire is said to be the mother and ignorance the father; the Vijnana
which recognizes an objective world is [compared to] the Buddha.
4. The secondary group of passions is the Arhat, the amassing of the
five Skandhas the Brotherhood; as these are to be destroyed
immediately they are known as immediacy-deeds.

Again Mahamati said: Pray tell me, Bhagavan, what makes the Buddhas
and the Bhagavans such as they are: that is, [what is] the Buddha-nature
of the Buddhas?
Said the Bhagavan: when the egolessness of things as well as of persons
is understood, when the knowledge of the twofold hindrance is
thoroughly taken hold of, when the twofold death (cyuti) is
accomplished, and when the twofold group of passions is destroyed,

there, Mahamati, is the Buddha-nature of the Buddhas and the
Bhagavans. When these teachings are experienced by the Sravakas and
Pratyekabuddhas, this is their Buddha-nature. So it is said:
5. The twofold egolessness, the twofold group of passions, the twofold
hindrance, and the inconceivable transformation-death, --when these
are attained, there is the Tathagata.

At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said this to
the Bhagavan: According to what deeper sense2 did you make this
announcement before the congregation, that "I am all the Buddhas of the
past," and that "I have gone through many a birth in varieties of forms,
being thus at times the king Mandhatri, Elephant, Parrot, Indra, Vyasa,
Sunetra, and other beings in my one hundred thousand births?"
Said the Bhagavan: There are, according to the deeper sense, four
kinds of sameness distinguished, Mahamati, and the Tathagatas, Arhats,
Fully-Enlightened Ones make this assertion: I was thus at that time the
Buddha Krakucchanda, Kanakamuni, and KaSyapa. What are the four
kinds of sameness which are distinguished according to the deeper
sense? They are: (1) sameness of letters, (2) sameness of words, (3)
sameness of teachings, and (4) sameness of the body. According to this
fourfold sameness in the deeper sense, the Tathagatas, Arhats, FullyEnlightened Ones make the announcement before the congregation.

Again Mahamati said: Pray tell me, Bhagavan, what makes the Buddhas
and the Bhagavans such as they are: that is, [what is] the Buddha-nature
of the Buddhas?
Said the Bhagavan: when the egolessness of things as well as of persons
is understood, when the knowledge of the twofold hindrance is
thoroughly taken hold of, when the twofold death (cyuti) is
accomplished, and when the twofold group of passions is destroyed,
there, Mahamati, is the Buddha-nature of the Buddhas and the

Bhagavans. When these teachings are experienced by the Sravakas and
Pratyekabuddhas, this is their Buddha-nature. So it is said:
5. The twofold egolessness, the twofold group of passions, the twofold
hindrance, and the inconceivable transformation-death, --when these
are attained, there is the Tathagata.

At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said this to
the Bhagavan: According to what deeper sense2 did you make this
announcement before the congregation, that "I am all the Buddhas of the
past," and that "I have gone through many a birth in varieties of forms,
being thus at times the king Mandhatri, Elephant, Parrot, Indra, Vyasa,
Sunetra, and other beings in my one hundred thousand births?"
Said the Bhagavan: There are, according to the deeper sense, four
kinds of sameness distinguished, Mahamati, and the Tathagatas, Arhats,
Fully-Enlightened Ones make this assertion: I was thus at that time the
Buddha Krakucchanda, Kanakamuni, and KaSyapa. What are the four
kinds of sameness which are distinguished according to the deeper
sense? They are: (1) sameness of letters, (2) sameness of words, (3)
sameness of teachings, and (4) sameness of the body. According to this
fourfold sameness in the deeper sense, the Tathagatas, Arhats, FullyEnlightened Ones make the announcement before the congregation.
Now, Mahamati, what is the sameness of letters? It is that my name is
[spelt] B-u-d-d-h-a, and these letters are also used for other Buddhas
and Bhagavans; Mahamati, these letters in their nature are not to be
distinguished one from another; therefore, Mahamati, there is the
sameness of letters.
Now, Mahamati, what is the sameness of words with regard to the
Tathagatas, Arhats, and Fully-Enlightened Ones? It is that sixty-four
sounds of the Brahman language are distinguished by me, and these
identical sixty-four sounds of the Brahman language are also uttered by
the Tathagatas, Arhats, and Fully-Enlightened Ones, and their

Kalavinka-like notes are the same with all of us, as we are
indistinguishable in this respect.
Now, Mahamati, what is the sameness of the body? It is that I and
other Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones are the same as
regards our Dharmakaya and the [thirty-two] signs and the [eighty]
minor excellencies of bodily perfection--no distinction existing among
us, except that the Tathagatas manifest varieties of forms according to
the different dispositions of beings, who are to be disciplined by
varieties of means.
Now, Mahamati, what is the sameness of the teaching? It is that I as
well as they [other Tathagatas] are all conversant with the teachings
belonging to the thirty-seven branches of enlightenment. According to
the deeper sense which is concerned with this fourfold sameness, the
Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones make their announcement
before the congregation. So it is said:
6. "I am KaSyapa, Krakucchanda, and Kanakamuni"; this I preach
who come out of the sameness for the sake of the sons of the Buddha.

Again Mahamati said: It is said by the Bhagavan that from the night of
the Enlightenment till the night of the Parinirvana, the Tathagata in the
meantime has not uttered even a word, nor will he ever utter; for notspeaking is the Buddha's speaking. According to what deeper sense is it
that not-speaking is the Buddha's speaking?
The Bhagavan replied: By reason of two things of the deeper sense,
Mahamati, this statement is made. What are the two things: They are the
truth of self-realisation and an eternally-abiding reality. According to
these two things of the deeper sense the statement is made by me. Of
what deeper sense is the truth of self-realisation? What has been
realised by the Tathagatas, that is my own realisation, in which there is
neither decreasing nor increasing; for the realm of self-realisation is free

from words and discriminations, having nothing to do with dualistic
terminology.
What is meant by an eternally-abiding reality? The ancient road of
reality, Mahamati, has been here all the time, like gold, silver, or pearl
preserved in the mine, Mahamati; the Dharmadhatu abides foreover,
whether the Tathagata appears in the world or not; as the Tathagata
eternally abides so does the reason (dharmata) of all things; reality
foreover abides, reality keeps its order, like the roads in an ancient city.
For instance, Mahamati, a man who is walking in a forest and
discovering an ancient city with its orderly streets may enter into the
city, and having entered into it, he may have a rest, conduct himself like
a citizen, and enjoy all the pleasures accruing therefrom. What do you
think, Mahamati? Did this man make the road along which he enters
into the city, and also the various things in the city?
Mahamati said: No, Bhagavan.
The Bhagavan said: Just so, Mahamati, what has been realised by
myself and other Tathagatas is this reality, the eternally-abiding reality
(sthitita), the self-regulating reality (niyamata), the suchness of things
(tathata), the realness of things (bhutata), the truth itself (satyata). For
this reason, Mahamati, it is stated by me that from the night of the
Tathagata's Enlightenment till the night of his entrance into Nirvana, he
has not in the meantime uttered, nor ever will utter, one word. So it is
said:
7. From the night of Enlightenment till that of Nirvana, I have not in the
meantime made any proclamation whatever.1
8. It is on account of the deeper meaning that the eternally-abiding
reality of self-realisation is talked of by me; and between myself and [all
the other] Buddhas, in this respect, there is no distinction whatever.

At that time, Mahamati made this request of the Bhagavan: Pray tell me,
Bhagavan, about the being and non-being of all things; and when myself
and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas are freed of the notions of being
and non-being, may we quickly attain supreme enlightenment.
The Bhagavan replied: Then, Mahamati, listen well and reflect well
within yourself; I will tell you.
Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said, Certainly, Bhagavan, and
gave ear to the Bhagavan.
Then the Bhagavan said: People of this world are dependent on two
things, Mahamati, that is, they are dependent on the idea of being and
on that of non-being, and they fall into the views whereby they take
pleasure either in nihilism or in realism. They imagine emancipation
where there is no emancipation.
Now, Mahamati, who are the people dependent on the notion of being?
It means this that they regard the world as rising from causation which is
really existent, and that the actually existing and becoming world does
not take its rise from causation which is non-existent. This will not be
the case if the world is something non-existing. They thus talk of the
really-existing world as arising from the reality of causation. This is the
realistic view of causation as held by some people.
Now, Mahamati, what is meant by being dependent upon the idea of
non-being? It means, Mahamati, admitting greed, anger, and folly, and
yet discriminating as regards the non-reality of what makes up greed,
anger, and folly; and, Mahamati, there is one who does not admit the
reality of things because of their being devoid of individual marks; and
there is another who, seeing that the Buddhas, Sravakas, and
Pratyekabuddhas are free from greed, anger, and folly, because of all
things being devoid of individual marks, [think that greed, anger, and
folly] do not exist.
Now, Mahamati, who of these is the one doomed to ruin?

Said Mahamati; Bhagavan, it is he who, admitting greed, anger, and
folly, yet refuses to admit them.
The Bhagavan said: Well said indeed, Mahamati! Again thou hast
indeed spoken well, Mahamati! Not only is he himself doomed to ruin
because of his notion of greed, anger, and folly as existent and yet as
not-existent, but he ruins even the character of the Buddha, the
Sravaka, and the Pratyekabuddha. Why? Because the passions are not
to be taken hold of innerly and outwardly, because they are neither
different nor not-different. Mahamati, greed, anger, and folly too are not
to be taken hold of innerly as well as outwardly; they have no substance
of their own and they are not to be admitted; Mahamati, as there is no
reality in the nature of greed, anger, and folly, [he who fails to
understand this] is the one who ruins the character of the Buddha,
Sravaka, and Pratyekabuddha. The Buddha, Sravaka, and
Pratyekabuddha are by nature emancipated as there is in them no cause
for being bound and binding; Mahamati, [on the other hand,] where
there is a state of being bound there are the binding and the cause of
bondage. [And yet there is] one who talks thus, [that is, denies
causation]; such is doomed to ruin. Mahamati, this characterises nihilism
and realism.
This is stated by me in accordance with the deeper sense. It is better to
cherish the notion of an ego-substance as much as Mount Sumeru than
to have the notion of emptiness derived from the self-conceited view of
being and non-being. One who is conceited in the view of being and
non-being is indeed doomed to ruin. Those who are delighted in
cherishing notions of individuality and generality fail to understand that
an external world is nothing but Mind itself and has no reality; and as
they do not understand this they regard things external as transient, for
they suffer every moment changes which follow one after another, now
splitting, now dividing, while the Skandhas, Dhatus, and ayatanas
succeeding one another and combining with one another, now come
forward and now pass away. They who thus disregarding words of the

scriptures are given up to wrong discriminations are also doomed to
ruin. So it is said:
9. As far as the duality of being and non-being extends, there is the
realm of intellection; when this realm vanishes, intellection completely
ceases.
10. When the external world is not grasped [as real] there is neither
causation nor reality; there is the essence of suchness (thatata), which is
the [spiritual] realm of the wise.
11. Those who believe in the birth of something that has never been in
existence and, coming to exist, finally vanishes away, --which leads
them to assert that things come to exist, things pass away, according to
causation, --such people have no foothold in my teaching.
12. It is not by the philosophers, not by the Buddhas, not by myself, not
by anybody else, but by causation that being obtains; how can one talk
of non-being?
13. When being obtains by causation, who can bring about non-being?
By reason of the wrong views based on the doctrine of birth, being and
non-being are discriminated.
14. When it is realised that there is nothing born, nothing passing away,
there is no way to admit its being and not-being; the world is to be
regarded as quiescent.

At that time again Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva requested of
the Bhagavan, saying: Pray point out to me, Bhagavan; pray point out to
me, Sugata; pray point out to me, Tathagata, Arhat, Fully-Enlightened
One! Pray tell me, Most Excellent One! What is the characteristic of the
realisation by which I and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas, becoming
thoroughly conversant with its meaning, may quickly attain the highest

enlightenment, and, relying upon themselves, will not be led away by
any speculations or philosophies?
Said the Bhagavan: Then listen well, Mahamati, and well reflect within
yourself; I will tell you.
Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said; Certainly, I will; and gave
ear to the Bhagavan.
Thereupon the Bhagavan said this: There are two ways of characterising
the realisation attained by all the Sravakas, the Pratyekabuddhas, and
the Bodhisattvas: the realisation itself and the teaching [about it]. Now,
Mahamati, by the realisation itself is meant that it is the realm of inner
attainment; its characteristic features are that it has nothing to do with
words, discriminations, and letters; that it leads one up to the realm of
non-outflows; that it is the state of an inner experience; that it is entirely
devoid of philosophical speculations and [the doings of] evil beings; and
that, destroying philosophical speculations and [the doings of] evil
beings, it shines out in its own inner light of attainment. These,
Mahamati, are the characteristics of the realisation.
Now, Mahamati, what is meant by the teaching [concerning it]? It is
variously given in the nine divisions of the doctrinal works; it keeps one
away from the dualistic notions of being and non-being, of oneness and
otherness; first making use of skilful means and expedients, it induces all
beings to have a perception [of this teaching] so that whoever is inclined
towards it, may be instructed in it. This, Mahamati, is the characteristic
of the teaching. Let, therefore, Mahamati, you and other BodhisattvaMahasattvas exert yourselves in this.
15. Realisation and teaching, self-attainment and doctrinal instruction-those who have an insight into the difference will not be led away by
philosophical authorities.

16. There is no truth in any object that is imagined by the ignorant;
deliverance is where there is no objective world; why is this not sought
by the speculators?
17. The world of the Samskritas is observed as the continuation of
birth-and-death, whereby dualisms are nourished, and because of this
perversion [the truth] is not perceived.
18. There is just one truth, which is Nirvana--it has nothing to do with
the Manas (intellection); the world seen as subject to discrimination
resembles a plantain tree, a dream,1 a vision.
19. No greed there is, no anger, nor folly either, and again, no personal
ego; from desire start the Skandhas, which resemble a dream.

At that time again Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva requested of
the Bhagavan, saying: Pray tell me, Bhagavan, pray tell me, Sugata,
regarding what characterises wrong discrimination (abhutaparikalpa).
Bhagavan, tell me as to the how, what, why, and who of wrong
discrimination, which, when rising and going on, constitutes what is
known as wrong discrimination; that is to say, to what kind of thought is
the term wrong discrimination applicable? or what kind of discrimination
is to be called wrong?
The Bhagavan said: Well said, well said, Mahamati; and again, well
said, indeed, Mahamati! You who have been admitted [into the order of
Bodhisattvas], Mahamati, think of this matter which is worth asking
about, for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many
people, because of your compassion for the world, for the benefit of the
multitudes, for the welfare and happiness of celestial beings and
humankind. Therefore, Mahamati, listen well and reflect well within
yourself as I tell you.
Certainly, Bhagavan; said Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, and
gave ear to the Bhagavan.

Then the Bhagavan said thus to him: When the multitudinousness of
objects is wrongly imagined [as real] and attached to, discrimination
goes on evolving; and, Mahamati, as people are attached tenaciously to
the notion of grasping, as they have not ascertained in their minds as to
the nature of the objective world which is no more than the Mind itself,
as they have fallen into the dualistic view of being and non-being, and,
Mahamati, as they are nourished by the habit-energy of the views and
discriminations of the philosophers, they perceive the multitudinousness
of external objects [as real] and become attached to them; and for this
reason a system of mentation--mind and what belongs to it --is
discriminated and is spoken of [as real], and with the assertion of an
ego-soul and its belongings, the system goes on functioning.
Said Mahamati: As you say, Bhagavan, when the multitudinousness of
external objects is wrongly imagined [as real] and attached to by
people, discrimination goes evolving on; and they fall into the dualistic
view of being and non-being,1 they nourish the views and
discriminations of the philosophers which are based on the notion of
grasped and grasping; and as they perceive the multitudinousness of
external objects [as real] and become attached to them, a system of
mentation--mind and what belongs to it --is discriminated and is spoken
of [as real] and goes on functioning owing to the fact that the external
world is not recognized as nothing but the Mind itself, and that the
multitudinousness of things is tenaciously clung to as subject to [the
notion of] being and non-being. This being the case, Bhagavan, the
multitudinousness of external objects which is characterised with the
dualism of being and non-being, is to be said neither existent nor nonexistent, and does not render itself to the formation of the philosophical
views. [Inasmuch as the external world owes its existence to
discrimination, it in itself must be said to be devoid of all forms of
dualism.] Bhagavan, in the same way the highest reality is declared to be
devoid of [all forms of logical analysis such as] the means of proof,
sense-perception, syllogistic arguments, illustration, reasoning, etc. How
is it, Bhagavan, that while, on the one hand, the discrimination of
multiplicity is said to go on operating on the strength of the attachment

which attaches itself to the multiplicity of external unrealities, the
attachment, on the other hand, to the highest reality does not give rise to
discrimination which goes on functioning in its own way? Is it not,
Bhagavan, unfair reasoning on your part to say, "It gives rise [to
discrimination]" in one place, and to say in another place, "It does not"?
2According to the Bhagavan, depending on and attaching to the dualism
of being and non-being, there evolve views characteristic of wrong
discrimination as when the magician produces varieties of people that
are not at all real and complete objects. Thus signs of existence and
non-existence are falsely imagined and go on so imagined; [but in fact
existence itself is] devoid of discrimination. If so, how does one come to
cherish the dualism as held by a man of the world?
Said the Bhagavan: Mahamati, discrimination, indeed, does not evolve,
nor is it put away. Why? Because there is no evolving of discrimination
as regards being and non-being; because the perception of objective
realities is not real; because all that is seen is to be recognized as nothing
but the Mind itself. Mahamati, discrimination does not evolve, nor is it
put away. But, Mahamati, for the sake of the ignorant who are addicted
to discriminating the multiplicity of things which are of their own Mind, it
is said by me that discrimination whose first function is to produce
effects takes its rise owing to the attachment to the aspect of multiplicity
as characteristic of objects. How otherwise, Mahamati, can the ignorant
and simple-minded have an insight into the Mind itself which they
discriminate, and see themselves freed from the notion of an ego and
what belongs to it, and also freed from the wrong conception of cause
and effect? And, again, how can they recognize that there is nothing but
Mind itself and cause a revulsion at the inmost seat of consciousness
(citta-sraya)? How can they have a clear perception of all the stages
and attain the inner realisation of the Tathagatas, which transcends the
five Dharmas, the three Svabhavas, and the idea of reality as well as
discrimination? For this reason, Mahamati, I state that discrimination
takes its rise from our attachment to the multiplicity of objects which are
not real, and that emancipation comes from our thoroughly
understanding the meaning of reality as it is and also the meaning of
multiplicity of things which evolve from discrimination. So it is said:

20. Those who, regarding the world as evolving from causes and
conditions, are attached to these notions as well as to the fourfold
proposition, fail to understand my teaching.
21. The world cannot be predicated anywhere as being, or as nonbeing, or as being-and-non-being, as is discriminated by the ignorant
who regard it as subject to causes and conditions,
22. When the world is seen [to be unpredicable with such notions as]
being, non-being, or being-and-non-being, a change takes place in the
mind, and egolessness is attained.
23. All things are unborn because they are born of causation; anything
that is born of causation is an effect, and from an effect nothing is
produced.
24. From an effect no effect is produced; [if you assert this,] you
commit the fault of a double effect; and this double effect being
untenable, no existence comes from an effect.
25. When the Samskrita [i. e. anything produced] is regarded as free
from [the dualism of] depended and depending, there decidedly is
Mind-only, and hence my teaching of Mind-only.
26. The [Mind as] norm is the abode of self-nature which has nothing to
do with a world of causation; of this norm which is perfect existence
and the highest Brahma, 1 I speak.
27. An ego-soul is a truth belonging to thought-construction, in which
there is no real reality; the self-nature of the Skandhas is also a thoughtconstruction, as there is no reality in it.
28. The sameness is of four kinds: individual forms, cause, the coming
into being,1 and the sameness of non-ego is the fourth: these are
subjects of discipline for the Yogins.

29. [There is a state which is] removed from all philosophical views,
free from imagined and imagining, of no attainment, and of no birth--this
I call Mind-norm.
30. Of neither existence nor non-existence do I speak, but of Mindonly which has nothing to do with existence and non-existence, and
which is thus2 free from intellection.
31. Suchness (tathata), emptiness, realm of truth (dharmadhatu), the
various forms of the will-body-- these I call Mind-only.
32. Multiplicity of objects evolves from the conjunction of habit-energy
and discrimination; it is born of Mind, but is regarded by people as
existing outwardly: this I call Mind-only.
33. The external world is not, and multiplicity of objects is what is seen
of Mind; body, property, and abode-- these I call Mind-only.

At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said this to the
Bhagavan: This is said by the Bhagavan that the BodhisattvaMahasattva and others should not grasp meaning [or reality, artha],
according to words. But, Bhagavan, why should not the BodhisattvaMahasattva grasp meaning from words? What are words? What is
meaning?
Said the Bhagavan: Then, Mahamati, listen well and reflect within
yourself well; I will tell you.
Thereupon said Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, Certainly,
Bhagavan; and gave ear to the Bhagavan.
The Bhagavan then said this to him: Now, Mahamati, how is speech
produced? Depending on discrimination and habit-energy [or memory]
as the cause, there is the conjunction and the distinction of sounds and

letters, which, issuing from the teeth, jaws, palate, tongue, lips, and the
cavity of the mouth, make mutual conversations possible. This is
speech. Now, Mahamati, what is meaning? The BodhisattvaMahasattva is said to have grasped meaning well, when, all alone in a
lonely place, he walks the path leading to Nirvana, by means of his
transcendental wisdom (prajna) which grows from learning, thinking,
and meditation, and causing a revulsion first at the source of habitenergy by his self-knowledge (svabuddhi), abides on the stages of selfrealisation where he leads a life full of excellent deeds.
Further, Mahamati, the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva who is conversant with
words and meaning observes that words are neither different nor notdifferent from meaning and that meaning stands in the same relation to
words. If, Mahamati, meaning is different from words, it will not be
made manifest by means of words; but meaning is entered into by
words as things [are revealed] by a lamp. It is, Mahamati, like a man
carrying a lamp to look after his property. [By means of this light] he
can say: This is my property and so is kept in this place. Just so,
Mahamati, by means of the lamp of words and speech originating from
discrimination, the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas can enter into the exalted
state of self-realisation which is free from speech-discrimination.
Further, Mahamati, if a man becomes attached to the [literal] meaning
or words and holds fast to their agreement in regard to the original state
of Nirvana which is unborn and undying, the Triple vehicle, the one
vehicle, the five [Dharmas], mentation, the [three] Svabhavas, etc., he
will come to cherish views either affirmative or negative. As varieties of
objects are seen in Maya and are discriminated [as real], statements are
erroneously made, discriminations erroneously go on. It is by the
ignorant that discriminations thus go on; it is otherwise with the wise.
So it is said:
34. 1Those who following words, discriminate and assert various
notions, are bound for hell because of their assertions.

35. The ego-soul is not with the Skandhas, nor are the Skandhas in the
ego-soul. They are not as they are discriminated, nor are they
otherwise.
36. The reality of objects is seen being discriminated by the ignorant; if
it were so as they are seen, all would be seeing the truth.
37. As all things are unreal, there is neither defilement nor purity; things
are not as they are seen, nor are they otherwise.

Further, Mahamati, I will tell you about the features of Jnana (absolute
knowledge) and Vijnana (relative knowledge)2; and when you and
other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas are well conversant with these
distinctive features of Jnana and Vijnana, you will quickly realise
supreme enlightenment. There are three kinds of Jnana--worldly, superworldly, and transcendental. Now, worldly knowledge belongs to the
philosophers and to the ignorant and simple-minded who are attached
to the dualistic views of being and non-being. Super-worldly knowledge
belongs to all the Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas who are attached to
the notions of individuality and generality. Transcendental knowledge
which is free from the dualism of being and non-being, belongs to the
Bodhisattvas and takes its rise when they thoroughly examine things of
imagelessness, see into the state of no-birth and no-annihilation, and
realise egolessness at the stage of Tathagatahood
Vijnana is subject to birth and destruction, and Jnana is not subject to
birth and destruction. Further, Mahamati, Vijnana falls into [the dualism
of] form and no-form, being and non-being, and is characterised with
multiplicity; but Jnana is marked with the transcendence of [the dualism
of] form and no-form. Further, Mahamati, Vijnana is characterised with
accumulation and Jnana with non-accumulation. Jnana is of three kinds:
that which assertains individuality and generality, that which assertains
birth and decay, and that which assertains no-birth and no-decay.

Further, Mahamati, Jnana is devoid of attachment; Vijnana attaches
itself to the multitudinousness of objects. Again, Vijnana is produced
from the concordance of the triple combination; Jnana, in its self-nature,
has nothing to do with combination or concordance. Again, Mahamati,2
Jnana is characterised with unattainability; it is the inner state of selfrealisation by noble wisdom, and as it neither enters nor goes out, it is
like the moon in water. So it is said:
38. Karma is accumulated by Citta, and discriminated by Jnana; and
one acquires by Prajna the state of imagelessness and the powers.
39. Citta is bound up with an objective world, Jnana evolves with
reflection; and Prajna evolves in the exalted state of imagelessness and
in the excellent conditions.
40. Citta, Manas, and Vijnana are devoid of thoughts and
discriminations;3 it is the Sravakas and not the Bodhisattvas that try to
reach reality by means of discrimination.
41. The Tathagata's Jnana is pure, [resting] in quietude in the most
excellent patience [or recognition of truth]; it is productive of excellent
sense and is devoid of purposive-ness (samudacara-varijitam).
42. Prajna, with me, is of three kinds; whereby the wise grow powerful,
individual signs are discriminated, and all things are manifested.1
43. My Prajna has nothing to do with the two vehicles, it excludes the
world of beings; that of the Sravakas evolves from their attachment to
the world of beings; the Tathagata's Prajna is spotless2 because of its
being in accord with Mind-only.

Further, Mahamati, there are nine kinds of transformation as held by the
philosophers endorsing the doctrine of transformation. They are: (1) the
transformation of form; (2) the transformation of characteristics; (3) the
transformation of cause; (4) the transformation of concordance; (5) the

transformation of view; (6) the transformation of origin; (7) the
transformation of nature; (8) the transformation of manifest conditions;
and (9) the transformation of manifest work. These, Mahamati, are the
nine views of transformation expounded by all the philosophers in
accordance with their secret teaching, and they are all founded upon the
dualism of being and non-being.
Now, Mahamati, by the transformation of form is meant the alteration of
form in appearance as gold takes various shapes when made into all
kinds of ornament. For example: gold is seen made into a bracelet, a
necklace, a fylfot, or what not; though the gold itself remains the same,
varieties of articles [made of it] are all different in form, that is, in their
transformations. In the same way, Mahamati, there is a general
transformation of things which is discriminated by other philosophers as
coming from a causal agency. They are not right, nor are they
otherwise. All differentiation in transformation is to be regarded as due
to discrimination, such as the thickening of milk into curds and the
ripening of fruit into a liquor. Mahamati, like this thickening and ripening
each transformation is a transformation rising from discrimination, which
is discriminated by the philosophers; really there is nothing transformed,
for the external objects of which being and non-being are discriminated,
are what is seen of Mind itself and have no reality of their own. In the
same way, Mahamati, what is regarded by the ignorant and simpleminded as the evolving of objects is no more than the discrimination of
their own mind, and, Mahamati, there is really nothing evolving, nothing
disappearing, as it is like seeing things that evolve in a vision and a
dream. Mahamati, it is like perceiving the rise and disappearance of
things in a dream; it is like the birth and death of a barren woman's
child. So it is said:
44. The transformation of the form in time, and the embracing [of the
soul] in the elements and sense-organs, which is in its middle-way
existence (antarabhava)--they who [thus] imagine [the birth of a child]
are not wise men.

45. The Buddhas do not discriminate the world as subject to the chain
of origination; but they regard the causation which rules this world as
something like the city of the Gandharvas.

At that time, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva asked the
Bhagavan to explain concerning the deep-seated attachment to the
existence of all things and the way of emancipation, saying: Pray tell me,
Bhagavan, pray tell me Tathagata, Arhat, Fully-Enlightened One,
concerning the characteristics of our deep attachment to existence and
of our detachment from it. When I and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas
understand well the distinction between attachment and detachment, we
shall know what is the skilful means concerning them, and shall no more
become attached to words according to which we grasp meaning.
When we understand well what is meant by attachment to the existence
of all things and the detachment from them, we shall destroy our
discrimination of words and letters; and, by means of our wisdom
(buddhi), enter into all the Buddha-lands and assemblies; be well
stamped with the stamp of the powers, the self-control, the psychic
faculties, and the Dharanis; and, well furnished with the wisdom
(buddhi) in the ten inexhaustible vows and shining with varieties of rays
pertaining to the Transformation Body, behave ourselves with
effortlessness like the moon, the sun, the jewel, and the elements; and
hold such views at every stage as are free from all the signs of selfdiscrimination; and, seeing that all things are like a dream, like Maya,
etc., [shall be able to] enter the stage and abode of Buddhahood, and
deliver discourses on the Dharma in the world of all beings and ill
accordance with their needs, and free them from the dualistic notion of
being and non-being in the contemplation of all things which are like a
dream and Maya, and free them also from the false discrimination of
birth and destruction; and. finally, [shall be able to] establish ourselves
where there is a revulsion at the deepest recesses [of our
consciousness], which is more than words [can express].
Said the Bhagavan: Well said, well said, Mahamati! Listen well to me
then, Mahamati, and reflect well within yourself; I will tell you.

Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said, Certainly, I will, Bhagavan;
and gave ear to the Bhagavan.
The Bhagavan said to him thus: Mahamati, immeasurable is our deepseated attachment to the existence of all things the significance of which
we try to understand after words. For instance, there are the deepseated attachments to signs of individuality, to causation, to the notion of
being and non-being, to the discrimination of birth and no-birth, to the
discrimination of cessation and no-cessation, to the discrimination of
vehicle and no-vehicle, of Samskrita and Asamskrita, of the
characteristics of the stages and no-stages, and the attachment to
discrimination itself, and to that arising from enlightenment, the
attachment to the discrimination of being and non-being on which the
philosophers are so dependent, and the attachment to the triple vehicle
and the one vehicle, which are discriminated.
These and others, Mahamati, are the deep-seated attachments
cherished by the ignorant and simple-minded to their discriminations.
Tenaciously attaching themselves to these the ignorant and simpleminded go on ever discriminating like the silk-worms who, with their
own thread of discrimination and attachment, enwrap not only
themselves but others and are charmed with the thread; and thus they
are ever tenaciously attached to the notions of existence and nonexistence. [But really] Mahamati, there are no signs here of deep-seated
attachment or detachment. All things are to be seen as abiding in
solitude where there is no evolving of discrimination. Mahamati, the
Bodhisattva-Mahasattva should have his abode where he can see all
things from the viewpoint of solitude.
Further, Mahamati, when the existence and non-existence of the
external world are understood to be due to the seeing of the Mind itself
in these signs, [the Bodhisattva] can enter upon the state of
imagelessness where Mind-only is, and [there] see into the solitude
which characterises the discrimination of all things as being and nonbeing and the deep-seated attachments resulting therefrom. This being

so, there are in all things no signs of a deep-rooted attachment or of
detachment. Here, Mahamati, is nobody in bondage, nobody in
emancipation, except those who by reason of their perverted wisdom1
recognize bondage and emancipation. Why? Because in all things
neither being nor non-being is to be taken hold of.
Further, Mahamati, there are three attachments deep-seated in the
minds of the ignorant and simple-minded. They are greed, anger, and
folly; and thus there is desire which is procreative and is accompanied
by joy and greed; closely attached to this there takes place a succession
of births in the [five] paths. Thus there are the five paths of existence for
all beings who are found closely attached [to greed, anger, and folly].
When one is cut off from this attachment, no signs will be seen indicative
of attachment or of non-attachment.
Further, Mahamati, depending upon and attaching to the triple
combination which works in unison, there is the continuation of the
Vijnanas incessantly functioning; and because of the attachment there is
a continued and deep-felt assertion of existence. When the triple
combination which causes the functioning of the Vijnanas no more takes
place, there is the triple emancipation, and when this is kept in view,
there is no rising of any combination. So it is said:
46. The imagining of things not existent--this is characteristic of
attachment [deeply seated in all beings]; when the truth of this is
thoroughly understood, the net of attachment is cleared away.
47. The ignorant take hold of the knowledge of existence according to
words and are bound up like the silk-worm with their own
discriminations; hence their ignorance of attachment [deeply seated in
their minds].

Further, Mahamati said: According to the Bhagavan, in all things that
are variously discriminated by discrimination there is no self-nature, as it
is nothing but [the creation of] false imagination (parikalpita); if,

Bhagavan, it is but [the creation of] false imagination and there is nothing
in the world which is to be conceived as indicative of self-nature, does it
not, Bhagavan, come to this, according to your statement, that there is
neither defilement nor purification, because all things are of the nature of
false imagination?
Said the Bhagavan: Mahamati, it is just as you say. The self-nature of
things is the discrimination of the ignorant and simple-minded, and it is
not as it- is discriminated by them. Mahamati, it is the creation of false
imagination; nothing indicative of self-nature is to be ascertained. But,
Mahamati, there is the self-nature of things such as is ascertained by the
wise, by their wise knowledge, by their wise insight, by their wise
transcendental vision.
Said Mahamati: Bhagavan, if there is the self-nature of things such as is
ascertained by the wise, by their wise knowledge, by their wise insight,
by their wise transcendental vision which is neither human nor celestial
vision, and if there is no such self-nature as is discriminated by the
ignorant and simple-minded, how, Bhagavan, can the ignorant and the
simple-minded abandon their discriminations, as they have no way to
recognize the presence of an exalted reality (aryabhavavastu)? For they
are neither perverted nor unperverted, Bhagavan. [that is, they are what
they are]. Why? Because they are unable to have an insight into the selfnature of exalted reality, because they see the course of things in the
aspect of being and non-being. And Bhagavan, the reality1 cannot be
such as is discriminated even by the wise, because the aspect of reality
as it is in itself cannot be an object [of discrimination by anybody];
because, Bhagavan, what appears to the wise as the self-nature of
reality is no more than the creation of their imagination, which is
predicable with the notion of causation and no-causation; that is, they
also cherish in their own way the idea of a being with self-nature. [And
they would say] that this is a realm that belongs to somebody else and is
not that [of the ignorant]. This is committing the fault of non-finality, for
thus what constitutes the self-nature of reality becomes impossible to
know. Bhagavan, what is derived from the imagination cannot be the
self-nature of reality. How is it that while things are said to exist owing

to the imagination2 [or discrimination], they are said again not to be
such as are imagined?
Bhagavan, [it is true that] according to the way the imagination is carried
on, the self-nature of reality conceived may vary; for when the cause is
not alike, the notion of reality that thus comes to be cherished may not
be alike. But according to you, Bhagavan, while the imagination is kept
on going with the wise as well as with the ignorant, the latter alone fail to
see reality as it is; and yet you tell us that the reason why it is said that
things are not really such as are imagined by the imagination is to make
all beings discard their imagination. Now, Bhagavan, is it that in order to
have all beings free from the notion of being [which is realism] and of
non-being [which is nihilism], you in turn make them cherish a realistic
view of existence1 by telling them to uphold the idea of the self-nature
of reality, whereby they are led to cling to the realm of noble wisdom?
Why do you deny the truth of solitude by teaching the doctrine of reality
whose self-nature is [according to you] noble wisdom?
Said the Bhagavan: Mahamati, it is not true that I deny truth of solitude,
nor that I fall into a realistic view by upholding the noble doctrine of
self-existing reality. But in order to save all beings from becoming
frightened, who are addicted from beginningless past to the notion of
self-nature, it is told them that there is truth of solitude, after making
them realise by means of noble wisdom that reality in its self-nature is
made the subject of attachment [by the ignorant]. Mahamati, the
doctrine of self-nature is not taught by me. But, Mahamati, those who
have realised by themselves truth of solitude as it really is and are
abiding in it, will see that [this existence of] error has no form; and
thereby knowing that what is seen is nothing but the Mind itself, they are
kept away from [dualistically] viewing an external world3 under the
aspect of being and non-being; they are stamped well with the stamp of
suchness which is gained by the triple emancipation; they will have an
intuition into the self-nature of all things by the wisdom which is acquired
within themselves, and thus get away from such ideas of reality as to
lead themselves to realism and nihilism.

Further, Mahamati, the thesis: "All things are unborn" is not to be
maintained by the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva as valid. Why? Of this thesis
it is to be stated that anything of which something is asserted partakes
thereby of the nature of being, and that the reason for this thesis is
characterised with the quality of birth; while it is being asserted by the
Bodhisattva-Mahasattva that all things are unborn, the very assertion
destroys his thesis. The thesis that all things are unborn acts against the
one who holds it because it is born of the principle of mutuality. Even
when this thesis of no-birth is to be maintained within the extent of
existence itself, the notion of no-birth cannot hold itself in it, and the
statement, the thesis, that all things are unborn is destroyed since it is
dependent on the members of the syllogism. As regards the thesis
maintaining the no-birth1 of being and non-being, Mahamati, this thesis,
to be valid, must be within the limits of existence itself; but there is no
aspect of existence which can be regarded either as being or as nonbeing. If, Mahamati, the no-birth of all things is to be asserted by this
thesis of no-birth, the very attempt defeats the thesis itself.2 Therefore,
this thesis is not to be upheld. Because many faults come out in
connection with the members of the syllogism, and because in these
syllogistic members there is a mutual mixing-up of reasons, this thesis is
not to be upheld.
As with [the thesis that] all things are unborn, so with [the thesis that] all
things are empty and have no self-nature--neither is to be maintained by
the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva. But, Mahamati, this is to be pointed out
by the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, that things in their self-nature are like
Maya, like a dream; for they are in one way perceived [as existing] and
in another way are not perceived [as such], and all things are thus seen
in [two] ways, in accordance either with knowledge or ignorance. Let it
be pointed out that all things are like Maya and a dream, except when
the feeling of fear is aroused in the minds of the ignorant. Mahamati, the
ignorant and the simple-minded are addicted to the views of being and
non-being, and are liable to tremble [at our teaching]; Mahamati, let
them not be frightened away from the Mahayana. So it is said:

48. There is no self-nature, no thought-construction, no reality, no
alaya-Vijnana; these, indeed, are so many discriminations cherished by
the ignorant who like a corpse are bad logicians.
49. All things are unborn--[this thesis] is established by all the
philosophers; [but] nothing whatever is ever born, [no establishment is
needed,] things are all linked by causation.
50. All things are unborn--no such discrimination is made by
transcendental knowledge; when a certain conclusion is made
depending on a cause, there is no sound judgment in it.
51. As a hair-net is what is wrongly perceived by those who are dimeyed, so existence discriminated [as real] is due to the wrong
discrimination of the ignorant.
52. The triple world is no more than thought-construction (Prajnapti),
there is no reality in its self-nature; by means of this thought-constructed
reality, logicians go on discriminating.
53. Individual form, reality, thought-construction, -- these are [only] a
mental disturbance; transcending all this, my sons will walk where there
is no discrimination.
54. As in a mirage in the air, the thought of water is cherished where
there is no water, so things are seen by the ignorant otherwise than by
the wise.
55. The insight of the wise, who move about in the realm of
imagelessness, is pure, is born of the triple emancipation, is released
from birth and destruction.
56. Where all things are wiped away, even a state of imagelessness
ceases to exist for the Yogins; in the sameness of existence and nonexistence, the fruit [of wisdom] is born to the wise.

57. How does existence cease to exist? How does the sameness take
place? When the mind fails to understand [the truth], there is
disturbance inside, outside, and in the middle; with the cessation [of the
disturbance] the mind sees the sameness.

Further, Mahamati said: It is told by the Bhagavan, again, that [true]
knowledge is gained independent of any object supporting it, and
whatever statements one makes about it are no more than thoughtconstruction, and that as this thought-construction is not to be seized as
real, the seizing act of the seizer itself ceases, and when there is thus no
seizing, knowledge which is known as discrimination no more evolves.
Now, Bhagavan, [how is transcendental knowledge unobtainable?] Is it
unobtainable because of our not recognizing the generality and
individuality of things, their pluralities, their unities? Or is it unobtainable
because [such ideas as] individuality, generality, multiplicity, and selfnature overpower one another? Or is it unobtainable because of the
obstructions presented by a wall, a mountain, an earth-work, a rampart,
or by earth, wind, water, or fire? Or because of remoteness or
nearness? Or does the knowledge fail to obtain its object of cognition
because of [the imperfection of] the sense-organs due to youth, age, or
blindness? If, Bhagavan, knowledge was not obtainable because of our
not recognizing individuality, generality, unity and plurality, then,
Bhagavan, such cannot be [transcendental] knowledge; it is to be called
ignorance (aJnana), for in spite of the fact that objects to be known are
before us we do not know them. Again, if knowledge is unobtainable
because [such ideas as] individuality, generality, multiplicity, and selfnature overpower one another, such is ignorance (aJnana). Bhagavan, it
is not [transcendental] knowledge. Where there is something to be
known, Bhagavan, knowledge evolves; where there is nothing, none
evolves; knowledge is possible [only] where there is a correspondence
with that which is known. Again, if knowledge is unobtainable because
of the obstruction presented by a wall, mountain, earthwork, rampart,
or by earth, water, wind, or fire, or due to farness or nearness, or on
account of the imperfection of the sense-organs as in the case of an
infant, the aged, and the blind, such as is unattainable is not

[transcendental] knowledge; it is ignorance, for the object to be known
is there but the knowing faculty is lacking.
Said the Bhagavan: Mahamati, such [knowledge as is unobtainable] is
not ignorance, such is [transcendental] knowledge; Mahamati, it is not
ignorance. It is not because of the deeper sense that I say this, but when
[we know that] there is knowledge gained independent of any
supporting object, whatever statements we make about it are no more
than thought-constructions. That [transcendental] knowledge is
unobtainable is due to the recognition that there is nothing in the world
but what is seen of the Mind, and that these external objects to which
being and non-being are predicated are non-existent. As this
[knowledge] is unobtainable, there is no evolving of knowing and
known, and as thus the triple emancipation is realised, there is
unattainable knowledge [which is transcendental]. But logicians being
under the habit-energy of the wrong reasoning which has been carried
on since beginningless time as to existence and non-existence are unable
to know all this, and, while not knowing it, they are concerned with
[such notions as] external objects, substances, forms, indications,
existence and non-existence; and yet they declare that the cessation of
discrimination is [the state of] the Mind-only. As they are tenaciously
clinging to the thought of an ego-soul and all that belongs to it, they are
really unable to understand what is meant by the doctrine of Mind-only,
and go on discriminating knowing and known. And because of their
discriminating knowing and known, they think of things as existent and
non-existent, and declaring that [transcendental knowledge] is
unobtainable, abide in nihilism. So it is said:
58. If [transcendental] knowledge fails to see an objective world which
lies before it, such is ignorance and not knowledge; this teaching
belongs to the logicians.
59. If [transcendental] knowledge fails to see, though various
obstructions far and near, its own unique object that does not present
itself [as an object], such is to be called wrong knowledge.

60. If [transcendental] knowledge fails to know, on account of defective
senses such as infancy, old age, and blindness, its own object which is
present, such is to be called wrong knowledge.

Further, Mahamati, the ignorant and simple-minded keep on dancing
and leaping fascinated with their wrong reasonings, falsehoods, and selfdiscriminations, and are unable to understand the truth of self-realisation
and its discourse in words; clinging to the external world which is seen
of the Mind itself, they cling to the study of the discourses which are a
means and do not know properly how to assertain the truth of selfrealisation which is the truth unspoiled by the fourfold proposition.
Said Mahamati: Bhagavan, it is just as you say. Pray tell me, Bhagavan,
about the characteristic features of the truth of self-realisation and about
the discourses on it, whereby I and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas in
future time, understanding what they are, may keep ourselves away
from the wrong logicians such as the philosophers and those who
belong to the vehicles of the Sravaka and the Pratyekabuddha.
Said the Bhagavan: Then, Mahamati, listen well and reflect well within
yourself; I will tell you.
Certainly, Bhagavan; said Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva and
gave ear to the Bhagavan.
The Bhagavan said this to him: Mahamati, there are two forms of
teaching the truth attained by the Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened
Ones of the past, present, and future. They are: the teaching by
discourses, and the teaching by the establishment of self-realisation.
What is meant
by the studying of the discourses is this, Mahamati: there are various
materials and canonical texts and discourses by which sentient beings
are taught according to their dispositions and inclinations. What then is
the truth of self-realisation by which the Yogins turn away from

discriminating what is seen of the Mind itself? There is an exalted state
of inner attainment which does not fall into the dualism of oneness and
otherness, of bothness and not-bothness; which goes beyond the Citta,
Manas, and ManoVijnana; which has nothing to do with logic,
reasoning, theorising, and illustrating; which has never been tasted by
any bad logicians, by the philosophers, Sravakas, and
Pratyekabuddhas, who have fallen into the dualistic views of being and
non-being-- this I call self-realisation. This, Mahamati, is what
characterises the truth of self-realisation and discoursing on it, and in this
you and the other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas are to discipline
themselves. So it is said:
61. I have two forms of teaching the truth: self-realisation and
discoursing. I discourse with the ignorant and [disclose] self-realisation
to the Yogins.

At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said this to
the Bhagavan: It was told at one time by the Bhagavan, the Tathagata,
the Arhat, the Fully-Enlightened One, that the Lokayatika who is
[skilled in] various forms of incantation and in the art of eloquence is not
to be honoured, adored, and reverently attended upon; for what one
gains from such devotions is worldly enjoyments and not the Dharma
[or Truth]. For what reason is this said, Bhagavan, that by devoting
ourselves to the Lokayatika who is skilled in varieties of incantations
and in the art of eloquence, worldly enjoyments are gained but not the
Dharma [or Truth]?
Said the Bhagavan: The Lokayatika who is skilled in varieties of
incantations and in the art of eloquence, Mahamati, puts the minds of
the ignorant in utter confusion by means of various reasonings, by
[clever manipulation of] words and phrases, and what he teaches being
the mere prattle of a child as far as one can make out is not at all in
accordance with truth nor in unison with sense. For this reason,
Mahamati, the Lokayatika is said to be skilled in varieties of
incantations and in the art of eloquence. He attracts the ignorant by

making clever use of various words, [but] he never leads them to the
way of truth and right teaching. As he himself does not understand what
all things mean, he puts the minds of the ignorant into utter confusion by
his dualistic views, thus ruining himself. Not being released of the
transition from one path to another, not understanding that there is
nothing but what is seen of the Mind itself, and attaching himself to the
idea of self-nature in external things, the Lokayatika knows no
deliverance from discrimination. For this reason, Mahamati, the
Lokayatika who is clever in various incantations and in the art of
eloquence, being thus never emancipated from such calamities1 as birth,
age, disease, sorrow, lamentation, pain, and despair, leads the ignorant
into bewilderment by means of various words, phrases, reasons,
examples, and conclusions.
Mahamati, Indra was a brilliant [Lokayatika] whose knowledge made
him master of many treatises and who was himself the author of a work
on sound. He had a disciple who assuming the body of a serpent went
up to heaven and got into the society of the god Indra. Making up a
thesis he challenged the god: Either your one-thousand-spoked chariot
be smashed to pieces, or every one of my own serpent-hoods be cut
off. In the argument the Lokayatika disciple who had assumed the form
of a serpent defeated [the god-opponent], whereupon the onethousand-spoked chariot was smashed to pieces. The disciple then
came down again to this world. In such a way, Mahamati, [the
Lokayatika] has a system composed of various reasonings and
exemplifications, and, knowing well even the minds of the animal world,
puts the gods and fighting demons in utter confusion by means of
various words and phrases; he then makes them tenaciously adhere to
the notion of coming and going (ayavyaya); how much more human
beings! For this reason, Mahamati, the Lokayatika is to be shunned, for
he carries with him the cause leading to the birth of pain. No homage,
no reverence, no service is to be shown him. Mahamati, the attainment
of the Lokayatika does not go beyond the realm of the body and
knowledge belonging to it, though he may explain his materialism by
using varieties of words and phrases amounting to a hundred thousand.
But in after times, after five hundred years, divisions will take place

[among his followers] leading them to wrong reasonings and
demonstrations; divisions will abound because of this, not being able to
hold disciples. Thus, Mahamati, materialism splitting into many parties
and adhering to varieties of reasonings is explained by the philosophers,
each of whom clings to his way of reasoning as he knows no truth
existing by itself. While this is not at all the case with [all] the
philosophers who have their own treatises and doctrines, materialism is
asserted under various disguises which are explained by a hundred
thousand different methods; there is in them [also] no truth existing by
itself, and they do not recognize that theirs is materialism because of
their stupidity.
Said Mahamati: If all the philosophers teach materialism by means of
various words, phrases, examples, and conclusions, which are not the
truth as it is, but are their own selfish assertions tenaciously maintained,
does not the Bhagavan too teach materialism by means of various
words and phrases, to the assemblages of the gods, demons, and
human beings, who come from various countries--I say, materialism
which is not the truth of self-realisation but is something like the
discourses of all the philosophers?
The Bhagavan said: I do not teach materialism, nor coming-and-going
(ayavyaya). But I teach, Mahamati, that which is not coming-and-going.
Now, Mahamati, coming means production and mass, it is born of
accumulation. Going, Mahamati, means destruction. That which is not
coming-and-going is designated unborn. Mahamati, I do not teach
anything approaching the discrimination of the philosophers. For what
reason? Because there are no external objects, there is nothing to get
attached to; when one abides in Mind-only, beyond which there is no
external world, dualism ceases; as there is no realm of form based on
discrimination, one comes to recognize that there is nothing but what is
seen of the Mind itself; and for these reasons the discrimination of what
is seen of the Mind itself does not take place. Owing to the cessation of
discrimination, one enters into the triple emancipation where is the state
of no-form, emptiness, and effortlessness. Hence it is called deliverance.

I remember, Mahamati, when I was staying in a certain place, a
Brahman Lokayatika approached where I was and having approached
suddenly asked me, saying: Gautama, is all created?
I said this to him: Brahman, if all is created, this is the first school of
materialism.
Guatama, is all uncreated?
Brahman, if all is uncreated, this is the second school of materialism.
Thus [to state that] all is non-eternal, or that all is eternal, or that all is
born, or that all is unborn, this, Brahman, is the sixth school of
materialism.
Again, Mahamati, the Brahman Lokayatika said this to me: Gautama, is
all one? Is all different? Is all characterised with bothness? Is all
characterised with not-bothness? Is all to be regarded as subject to
causation since all is seen as born of varieties of causes?
This, Brahman, is the tenth school of materialism.
Again, Gautama, is all explainable? Is all unexplainable? Is there an egosoul? Is there no ego-soul? Is this world real? Is this world not-real? Is
there another world? Is there no other world? Is another world existent
or non-existent?1 Is there emancipation? Is there no emancipation? Is
all momentary? Is all not momentary? Are space, Apratisa?khyanirodha,2 and Nirvana, O Gautama, are they created or uncreated? Is
there the middle existence? Is there no middle existence?
I then said this to him, Mahamati: If so, Brahman, this is materialism. It
is not mine. O Brahman, it is your worldly philosophy. I explain,
Brahman, that the triple world has its cause in the habit-energy of
discrimination going on since beginningless time on account of error and
wrong reasoning: for discrimination takes place. Brahman, because it is
not recognized that there is no external world but the Mind itself, and
not because an external world is seen as the object of cognition.

According to the philosophers, there is a triple concordance of an egosoul, sense-organs, and an objective world, but such is not mine.
Brahman, I do not belong to the school of causation, nor to the school
of no-causation, except that I teach the chain of origination as far as the
thought-constructed world of grasped and grasping exists depending on
discrimination. This is not understood by you and others who cherish
the notion of an ego-soul and its continuity. Mahamati, space, Nirvana,
and causation exist in enumeration; as realities they are unobtainable.
Hence the question whether they are created or not requires no
answering.
Again, Mahamati, the Brahman Lokayatika said this: Is the triple world
to be regarded as caused by ignorance, desire, and action? or is it
causeless?
Brahman, this twofold question again belongs to materialism.
Gautama, are all things to be conceived under the aspect of individuality
and generality?
This, too, Brahman, belongs to materialism. So long as there is a mental
perturbation which makes one cling to an objective world of
discrimination, there is materialism.
Further, Mahamati, this Brahman materialist said this to me: Gautama, is
there any philosophy that is not of the world? All the truth that is taught
by all the philosophers by means of varieties of words and phrases, by
means of reasons, examples, and conclusions, by general consent,
Gautama, belongs to me.
Brahman, there is something that does not belong to you, though it is not
beyond the truth of general consent, nor independent of varieties of
words and phrases, and further, it is not out of accord with reason.
[The Brahman asked,] Is there any philosophy that is not of the world
and yet belongs to the general opinion of the world?

Brahman, there is that which does not belong to materialism and which
is not reached by your wisdom nor by that of the philosophers who
cling to false discriminations and wrong reasonings as they fail to see the
unreality of external objects. By this is meant the cessation of
discrimination. When it is recognized that there is nothing beyond what
is seen of the Mind itself, the discrimination of being and non-being
ceases; as thus there is no external world as the object of perception,
discrimination abides in its own abode.1 This is not of materialism; it
belongs to me, it does not belong to you. By abiding in its own abode is
meant that it ceases to evolve; as discrimination is no more born, it is
said to have ceased to evolve. This, Brahman, is not of materialism. In
short, Brahman, if there is any coming-and-going of the Vijnanas, a
vanishing-and-appearing, a solicitation, an attachment, an intense
affection, a philosophical view, a theory, an abode, a touch, the clinging
to various signs, assemblage, continuity, desire (trishna), and attachment
to a cause, this, Brahman, is materialism of yours but not mine.
Mahamati, I was thus questioned by the Brahman materialist, who came
to me, and when he was thus sent off ho silently departed.
At that time there came to the Bhagavan the King of the Nagas, called
Krishnapakshaka, who assumed the body of a Brahman and said thus:
Gautama, is there not another world?
Now, young man, whence do you come?
Gautama, I am come from White Isle.
Brahman, that is another world.
The young man thus refuted and put to silence made himself invisible
without asking me anything about my own teaching, which stands in
opposition to his;1 he thought within himself: This son of the Sakyas
stands outside of my own system; he is a pitiable fellow, he belongs to
the school which holds the cessation of signs and causes, he talks of the

cessation of discrimination which will take place when there is the
cognition of an external world as something seen of one's own
discrimination. And, Mahamati, you too ask me how, for one who
serves the Lokayatika skilled in various incantations and in the art of
eloquence, there are worldly enjoyments and not the attainment of the
Dharma.
Said Mahamati; What is meant, Bhagavan, by the words, "the objects
of worldly enjoyment" and "the Dharma"?
Said the Bhagavan: Well said, well said, Mahamati! You have thought
deeply about this twofold meaning, having in view present and future
generations. Then, Mahamati, listen well and reflect well within yourself;
I will tell you.
Certainly, Bhagavan; said Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva and
gave ear to the Bhagavan.
The Bhagavan said this to him: What is meant by a worldly object of
enjoyment, Mahamati? It means that which can be touched, attracted
by, wiped off, handled, and tasted; it is that which makes one get
attached to an external world, enter into a dualism on account of a
wrong view, and appear again in the Skandhas, where, owing to the
procreative force of desire, there arise all kinds of disaster such as birth,
age, disease, death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, despair, etc. This is
called the object of worldly enjoyment by myself and other Buddhas.
This, Mahamati, is the attainment of worldly enjoyments and not that of
the Truth. It is materialism which one learns by serving the Lokayatika.
Mahamati, what is meant by the attainment of the Dharma (Truth)?
When the truth of Self-mind and the twofold egolessness are
understood, and further, when the nature of the egolessness of things
and persons is seen into, discrimination ceases to assert itself; when the
various stages of Bodhisattvahood are thoroughly perceived one after
another, the Citta, Manas, and ManoVijnana are turned away; and
when one enters upon the path of baptism by the wisdom of all the

Buddhas, and takes hold of the [ten] inexhaustible vows,1 one becomes
sovereign master of all things by virtue of a life of effortlessness. Hence
it is called the Dharma, as one is thereby released from all philosophical
views, unsound reasonings, discriminations, and dualistic notions. As a
rule, Mahamati, the philosophical views lead the ignorant, though not the
wise, to a dualism, that is, to nihilism and eternalism. Eternalism rises
from embracing a doctrine of no-causation, while nihilism rises from
believing in the annihilation of causal conditions and in the non-existence
of a cause. I teach, however, the Dharma so called which is [subject to]
the conditions of rising, abiding, and destruction. This, Mahamati, is the
conclusion with regard to worldly enjoyment and the Dharma. So it is
said:
62. Beings are subdued by the reception (samgraha), and are brought
into subjection by the moral precepts (Sila); they are removed from
philosophical views by transcendental knowledge (Prajna) and are
nourished by the emancipations
63. All that is taught by the philosophers to no purpose is materialism;
where the realistic view of cause and effect is cherished, there is no selfrealisation.
64. I teach to my group of disciples one self-realisation which has
nothing to do with cause and effect, being free from materialism.
65. There is nothing but that which is seen of the Mind itself, the duality
too is of the Mind; while existence1 is [observed as divided into] the
grasped and the grasping, it has nothing to do with eternalism or
nihilism.
66. As long as mentation goes on, there is materialism; when there is no
rising of discrimination, the world is seen as of Mind itself.
67. "Coming" (ayam) means the originating of the objective world as
effect, and "going" (vyayam) is the not-seeing2 of the effect; when one
thoroughly understands the "coming-and-going," discrimination ceases.

68. Eternity and non-eternity, 'the made and not-made, this world and
that world--all these and other [ideas] belong to materialism.

At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said this to
the Bhagavan: Nirvana, Nirvana is talked of by the Bhagavan; what
does this term designate? What is the Nirvana that is discriminated by
all the philosophers?
Said the Bhagavan: Then, Mahamati, listen well and reflect well within
yourself; I will tell you.
Certainly, Bhagavan; said Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva and
gave ear to the Bhagavan.
The Bhagavan said this to him: As to such Nirvanas as are discriminated
by the philosophers, there are really none in existence. Some
philosophers conceive Nirvana to be found where a system of
mentation no more operates owing to the cessation of the Skandhas,
Dhatus, and ayatanas, or to the indifference to the objective world, or
to the recognition that all things are impermanent; or where there is no
recollection of the past and present, just as when a lamp is extinguished,
or when a seed is burnt, or when a fire goes out, because then there is
the cessation of all the substrate, which is explained by the philosophers
as the non-rising of discrimination. But, Mahamati, Nirvana does not
consist in mere annihilation.
Again, some explain deliverance by going to another quarter and abode,
as when a wind stops blowing, when the discrimination of objects
ceases. Again, some philosophers explain deliverance by the getting-rid
of the [dualistic] view of knower and known. Some conceive
deliverance to be the cessation of discrimination where one sees
permanence and impermanence.

Again, some explain the discrimination of various forms as the bearer of
pain, and yet not understanding that there is nothing but what is seen of
the Mind itself, are alarmed by the notion of form, and seek their
happiness in formlessness.1 In this they cherish the notion of Nirvana.
Again some conceive this to be Nirvana: that in consideration of
generality and individuality recognizable in all things inner and outer, they
are never destroyed, maintaining their being throughout the past,
present, and future. Again some conceive that Nirvana is an ego-soul, a
being, a vital force, a nourisher, a supreme spirit, and the
indestructability of all things.
Again, Mahamati, some philosophers owing to their foolishness declare
this to be Nirvana: that there is a primary substance, there is a supreme
soul, and they are seen differently by each, and that they produce all
things from the transformations of the qualities.
Some conceive Nirvana to consist in the extinction of merit and demerit;
some in the destruction of the passions by means of knowledge; some in
regarding ISvara as the free creator of the world. Some think that the
world is born of interaction and that there is no [special] cause other
than this cause, and clinging to it they have no awakening because of
stupidity, and they conceive Nirvana to consist in this non-awakening.
Again, Mahamati, some philosophers conceive Nirvana to be the
attaining of the true path. Some cherish the thought of Nirvana as where
there is the union of qualities and their owner, from which there is
oneness and otherness, bothness and not-bothness. Some imagine that
Nirvana is where they see the self-nature of things existing all by its own
nature, such as the variegated feathers of the peacock, variously formed
precious stones, or the pointedness of a thorn.
Some, Mahamati, conceive Nirvana in the recognition of the twenty-five
Tattvas (truths); some in the king's observance of the teaching of the six
virtues. Some, seeing that time is a creator and that the rise of the world
depends on time, conceive that Nirvana consists in recognizing this fact.

Again, Mahamati, some conceive being to be Nirvana, some non-being,
while some conceive that all things and Nirvana are not to be
distinguished one from the other.
All these views of Nirvana severally advanced by the philosophers with
their reasonings are not in accord with logic, nor are they acceptable to
the wise. Mahamati, they all conceive Nirvana dualistically and in a
causal connection. By these discriminations, Mahamati, all philosophers
imagine Nirvana, but there is nothing rising, nothing disappearing here, [and there is no room for discrimination.] Mahamati, each philosopher
relying on his own text-book from which he draws his understanding
and intelligence, examines [the subject] and sins against [the truth],
because [the truth] is not such as is imagined by him; [his reasoning]
ends in setting the mind to wandering about and becoming confused, as
Nirvana is not to be found anywhere.
Again, Mahamati, there are others who, roaring with their allknowledge as a lion roars, explain Nirvana in the following wise: that is,
Nirvana is where it is recognized that there is nothing but what is seen of
the Mind itself; where there is no attachment to external objects,
existent or nonexistent; where, getting rid of the four propositions, there
is an insight into the abode of reality as it is; where, recognizing the
nature of the Self-mind, one does not cherish the dualism of
discrimination; where grasped and grasping are no more obtainable;
where all logical measures are not seized upon as it is realised that they
never assert themselves; where the idea of truth is not adhered to but
treated with indifference because of its causing a bewilderment; where,
by the attainment of the exalted Dharma which lies within the inmost
recesses of one's being, the two forms of egolessness are recognized,
the two forms of passions subsided, and the two kinds of hindrance
cleared away; where the stages of Bodhisattvahood are passed one
after another until the stage of Tathagatahood is attained, in which all the
Samadhis beginning with the Mayopama (Maya-like) are realised, and
the Citta, Manas, and ManoVijnana are put away:1 [here indeed they
say Nirvana is to be found].

69. Nirvana is severally conceived by the philosophers; but theirs is no
more than imagination, it is not the way of emancipation.
70. Released of bound and binding and free from all expediencies, the
philosophers imagine they are emancipated, but emancipation is not to
be found there.
71. Divided into many a school are the systems of the philosophers;
there is thus no emancipation in them, because of their imagination
stupidly carried on.
72. Wrongly imbued with the ideas of cause and effect, all the
philosophers are beguiled, and their is thus no emancipation for them
who are of the dualistic school of being and non-being.
73. The ignorant are delighted with discoursing and false reasoning [but]
they are unable to raise any great intelligence towards truth (tattva),
discoursing is a source of suffering in the triple world, while truth is the
extinguisher of suffering.
74. Like an image seen in a mirror, which is not real, the Mind is seen
by the ignorant in a dualistic form in the mirror of habit-energy.
75. When it is not thoroughly understood that there is nothing but what
is seen of the Mind itself, dualistic discriminations take place; when it is
thoroughly understood that there is nothing but what is seen of the Mind
itself, discrimination ceases,
76. Mind is no other than multiplicity, [and yet it is] devoid of qualified
and qualifying; forms are visible but not in the way as seen discriminated
by the ignorant.
77. The triple world is no other than discrimination, there are no
external objects; discrimination sees multiplicity, this is not understood
by the ignorant.

78. [The truth] is told [differently] discriminated in the different sutras
because of names and notions; [yet] apart from words no meaning is
attainable.

At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said this to him: Tell
me, Bhagavan, Tathagata, Arhat, Fully-Enlightened One, concerning the
self-nature of Buddhahood, whereby I and other BodhisattvaMahasattvas, understanding well what constitutes the self-nature1 of the
Tathagata, may have both ourselves and others awakened [in the truth].
The Bhagavan said: Then, Mahamati, ask me as you desire, according
to which I will answer.
Mahamati replied: Bhagavan, is the Tathagata, the Arhat, the FullyEnlightened One to be considered unmade or made, an effect or a
cause, predicated or predicating, an expression or that which is
expressed, knowledge or that which is knowable? Is the Bhagavan
different from all these expressions, or not?
The Bhagavan said: If the Tathagata, Arhat, Fully-Enlightened One is to
be described by those expressions, he is neither made nor unmade,
neither an effect nor a cause. Why? Because the error of dualism would
here be committed. If, Mahamati, the Tathagata is something made, he
is impermanent; if he is impermanent, anything made would be a
Tathagata, which is not desired by myself and other Tathagatas. If he is
something unmade, his self-essence being attainment, all the
preparations brought forward [for the realisation of Tathagatahood] will
be useless, like a hare's horns, or a barren woman's child, because of
their never having been made. That which is neither an effect nor a
cause, Mahamati, is neither a being nor a non-being; and that which is
neither a being nor a non-being is outside the four propositions. The
four propositions, Mahamati, belong to worldly usage. That which is
outside the four propositions is no more than a word, like a barren
woman's child. Mahamati, a barren woman's child is a mere word and
is beyond the four propositions. As it is beyond them, the wise know it

to be not subject to measurement. So is the meaning of all the terms
concerning the Tathagata to be understood by the wise.
It is told by me that all things are egoless; by this is meant, Mahamati,
that they are devoid of selfhood; hence this egolessness. What I mean is
that all things have each its own individuality which does not belong to
another, as in the case of a cow and a horse. For example, Mahamati,
the being of a cow is not of horse-nature, nor is the being of a horse of
cow-nature. This [exemplifies] the case of neither being nor non-being.
Each of them is not without its own individuality, each is such as it is by
its own nature. In the same way, Mahamati, things are not each without
its own individuality, they are such as they are, and thus the ignorant and
simple-minded fail to understand the signification of egolessness by
reason of their discrimination; indeed, they are not free from
discrimination. The same is to be known exactly about all things being
empty, unborn, and without self-nature.
In the same way the Tathagata and the Skandhas are neither notdifferent nor different. If he is not different from the Skandhas, he is
impermanent as the Skandhas are something made. If they are different,
they are two separate entities; the case is like a cow's horns. As they
look alike, they are not different; as the one is short and the other long,
they are different. [This can be said] of all things. Mahamati, the right
horn of a cow is thus different from her left horn; so is the left from the
right; the one is longer or shorter than the other. The same can be said
of varieties of colours. Thus the Tathagata and the Skandhas are neither
different nor not-different the one from the other.
In the same way, the Tathagata is neither different nor not-different from
emancipation, he can be described in terms of emancipation. If the
Tathagata is different from emancipation, he partakes of the nature of a
material object; if he does he is impermanent. If he is not different, there
will be no distinction in the attainments of the Yogins, and, Mahamati, a
distinction is seen in the Yogins; therefore, [the Tathagata] is neither
different nor not-different [from emancipation].

In the same way, knowledge is neither different nor not-different from
that which is known. That, Mahamati, which is neither eternal nor noteternal, neither effect nor cause, neither effect-producing nor not-effectproducing, neither knowledge nor that which is knowable, neither
predicated nor predicating, neither the Skandhas nor different from the
Skandhas, neither that which is expressed nor expression, nor boundup with oneness and otherness, with bothness and not-bothness, --this
is something removed from all measurement; that which is removed
from all measurement is not expressible in words;1 that which is not
expressible1 is something unborn; that which is unborn is not subject to
destruction; that which is not subject to destruction is like space, and,
Mahamati, space is neither an effect nor a cause. That which is neither
an effect nor a cause is something unconditioned. That which is
unconditioned goes beyond all idle reasonings. That which goes beyond
all idle reasonings, that is the Tathagata. Mahamati, this is the essence of
perfect enlightenment, this is the self-nature of Buddhahood which is
removed from all senses and measurements. So it is said:
79. That which is released from senses and measurements is neither an
effect nor a cause; it has nothing to do with knowledge and that which is
to be known; it is free from predicated and predicating.
80. There is something which is nowhere to be seen by anybody as the
Skandhas, causation, enlightenment; of that which is nowhere to be seen
by anybody, what description can we make?
81. It is not something made nor unmade, it is neither an effect nor a
cause, it is neither the Skandhas nor not-Skandhas, nor is it other than
the combination.
82. There is something that is not to be seen by the discrimination of its
being, nor is it to be known as nonexistent; such is the self-essence of all
things.

83. Accompanied by being, there is non-being; accompanied by nonbeing there is being; as thus non-being is not to be known [by itself],
being is not to be discriminated.
84. Those who cling to mere words, not knowing what is meant by an
ego-soul and egolessness, are immersed in dualism; they are corrupted
and lead the ignorant to corruption.
85. When they see my religion liberated from all detriments, they behold
properly, they do not defile the world-leaders.

At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said this to
the Bhagavan: Tell me, Bhagavan; tell me, Sugata. Mention is made in
the canonical books of the Bhagavan's being subject neither to birth nor
to destruction, and it is declared by you that this being subject neither to
birth nor to destruction is an epithet of the Tathagata. Now, Bhagavan,
by this being subject neither to birth nor to destruction, is a non-entity
meant? And is it another name for the Tathagata, as is declared by the
Bhagavan? It is taught by the Bhagavan that all things are subject neither
to birth nor to destruction because they are not to be seen in the
dualistic aspect of being and non-being. If all things are unborn,
Bhagavan, no one can take hold of anything because nothing has ever
been born; and if that is another name of something, what can this
something be, Bhagavan?
The Bhagavan said: Then, Mahamati, listen well and reflect well within
yourself; I will tell you.
Certainly, Bhagavan, said Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva and
gave ear to the Bhagavan.
The Bhagavan said this to him: Mahamati, the Tathagata is not a nonentity; nor is he to be conceived as all things are, as neither born nor
disappearing; nor is he to look around for causation [in order to appear
before others]; nor is he without signification; I refer to him as unborn.

Nevertheless, Mahamati, there is another name for the Tathagata when
his Dharmakaya assumes a will-body. This is what goes beyond the
comprehension of the philosophers, Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and
those Bodhisattvas still abiding in the seventh stage. The unborn,
Mahamati, is synonymous with the Tathagata.
For instance, Mahamati, Indra is [sometimes known as] Sakra,
[sometimes? as] Purandara; hand is hasta, kara, pani; the body is tanu,
deha, Sarira; the earth is p?ithivi, bhumi, vasu?dhara; the sky is kha,
akaSa, gagana; all these objects each in its way are designated with
many names, synonymously used and discriminated; but on account of
these different names different objects are not to be imagined, nor are
they without their self-nature. The same, Mahamati, can be said of
myself, for I come within the range of hearing of ignorant people, in this
world of patience, under many names, amounting to a hundred thousand
times three asamkhyeyas, and they address me by these names not
knowing that they are all other names of the Tathagata. Of these,
Mahamati, some recognize me as the Tathagata, some as the Selfexistent One, some as Leader, as Vinayaka (Remover), as Parinayaka
(Guide), as Buddha, as Rishi (Ascetic), as Bull-king, as Brahma, as
Vishnu, as iSvara, as Original Source (pradhana), as Kapila, as
Bhutanta (End of Reality), as Arishta, as Nemina, as Soma (moon), as
the Sun, as Rama, as Vyasa, as Suka, as Indra, as Balin, as Varuna, as
is known to some; while others recognize me as One who is never born
and never passes away, as Emptiness, as Suchness, as Truth, as
Reality, as Limit of Reality, as the Dharmadhatu, as Nirvana, as the
Eternal, as Sameness, as Non-duality, as the Undying, as the Formless,
as Causation, as the Doctrine of Buddha-cause, as Emancipation, as the
Truth of the Path, as the All-Knower, as the Victor, as the Will-made
Mind. Mahamati, thus in full possession of one hundred thousand times
three asamkhyeyas of appellations, neither more nor less, in this world
and in other worlds, I am known to the peoples, like the moon in water
which is neither in it nor out of it. But this is not understood by the
ignorant who have fallen into the dualistic conception of continuity.1
Though they honour, praise, esteem, and revere me, they do not
understand well the meaning of words and definitions; they do not

distinguish ideas, they do not have their own truth, and, clinging to the
words of the canonical books, they imagine that not being subject to
birth and destruction means a non-entity, and fail to see that it is one of
the many names of the Tathagata as in the case of Indra, Sakra,
Purandara. They have no confidence in the texts where the self-standing
truth is revealed, since in their study of all things they follow mere words
as expressed in the texts trying thereby to gain into the meaning.

Thus, Mahamati, these deluded ones would declare that as words are
so is meaning, that meaning is not otherwise than words. For what
reason? Because meaning has no body of its own and cannot be
different from words. That the unintelligent declare words to be identical
with meaning, is due to their ignorance as to the self-nature of words.
They do not know, Mahamati, that words are subject to birth and death
whereas meaning is not. Mahamati, words are dependent on letters, but
meaning is not. As meaning is freed from existence and non-existence, it
is not born, it has no substratum. And, Mahamati, the Tathagatas do not
teach the doctrine that is dependent upon letters. As to letters, their
being or non-being is not attainable; it is otherwise with the thought that
is never dependent on letters. Again, Mahamati, anyone that discourses
on a truth that is dependent on letters is a mere prattler because truth is
beyond letters. For this reason, Mahamati, it is declared in the canonical
text by myself and other Buddhas and Bodhisattvas that not a letter is
uttered or answered by the Tathagatas. For what reason? Because
truths are not dependent on letters. It is not that they never declare what
is in conformity with meaning; when they declare anything, it is
according to the discrimination [of all beings]. If, Mahamati, the truth is
not declared1 [in words] the scriptures containing all truths will
disappear, and when the scriptures disappear there will be no Buddhas,
Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and Bodhisattvas; and when there is no
one [to teach], what is to be taught and to whom? For this reason, then,
Mahamati, the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva is not to become attached to
the words of the canonical texts. Mahamati, owing to the functioning of
the minds of sentient beings, the canonical texts sometimes deviate from
their straightforward course; religious discourses are given by myself

and other Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones in response to
varieties of faiths on the part of beings, in order to remove them from
[the bondage of] the Citta, Manas and ManoVijnana, and not for the
attainment and establishment of self-realisation which issues from noble
wisdom. When there is the recognition of the fact that all things are
characterised with imagelessness and that there is nothing in the world
but what is seen of the Mind itself, there is the discarding of the dualistic
discrimination.
Therefore, Mahamati, let the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva be in conformity
with the meaning and not with the letter. Mahamati, a son or a daughter
of a good family who conforms himself or herself to the letter will ruin
his or her understanding of ultimate reality1 and will cause others to fail
to recognize [the truth]. Continuing to cherish wrong views, one's own
assertion is confounded by the philosophers who do not understand
well what characterises all the stages of the Dharma, and who have no
adequate knowledge as to the interpretation of words. If they well
understand what characterises all the stages of the Dharma and are
adequately equipped with the interpretation of words and expressions,
and have a good understanding of the meaning and reason of all things,
they will properly enjoy by themselves the bliss of formlessness while
others are properly established in the Mahayana. Being properly
embraced in the Mahayana they will, Mahamati, be in the embrace of
the Buddhas, Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and Bodhisattvas. Being
embraced by the Buddhas, Bodhisattvas, Pratyekabuddhas, and
Sravakas, they will [in turn] embrace all beings. Embracing all beings
they will embrace the good Dharma. The good Dharma being
embraced, the Buddha-seeds will not be destroyed. When the Buddhaseeds are not destroyed, the excellent abodes will be attained. When
thus these excellent abodes are attained, Mahamati, the BodhisattvaMahasattvas will see to it that [all beings], being established in the
Mahayana, are born there [in the excellent abodes], and fortifying
themselves with the tenfold supernatural power and assuming various
forms, they will discourse on the Dharma in conformity to its true nature
(tathatva), and with a thorough knowledge of various wishes and
characteristics of beings. Now the true nature of things (tathatva) is

characterised by non-differentiation and trueness, it is neither coming
nor departing, it puts a stop to all idle reasonings, and it is called the
truth (tattvam).
Therefore, Mahamati, let son or daughter of a good family take good
heed not to get attached to words as being in perfect conformity with
meaning, because the truth is not of the letter. Be not like the one who
looks at the finger-tip. For instance, Mahamati, when a man with his
finger-tip points at something to somebody, the finger-tip may be taken
wrongly for the thing pointed at; in like manner, Mahamati, the people
belonging to the class of the ignorant and simple-minded, like those of a
childish group, are unable even unto their death to abandon the idea that
in the finger-tip of words there is the meaning itself, and will not grasp
ultimate reality because of their intent clinging to words which are no
more than the finger-tip to them. To give another illustration, Mahamati:
boiled rice is the proper food for infants, to whom [suppose] somebody
gave uncooked food to eat. In this case, this one is to be considered to
be out of his sense because of his not knowing how to prepare food
properly. So it is with that which is neither born nor destroyed,
Mahamati; it will not manifest itself to anybody unless he is well
disciplined in it. Therefore, you should most assuredly discipline yourself
in this and not be like one who grasping his own finger-tip sees the
meaning there. For this reason, Mahamati, you should energetically
discipline yourself to get at the meaning itself.
Mahamati, the meaning is alone with itself (vivikta) and is the cause of
Nirvana. Words are bound up with discrimination and are the carrier of
transmigration. Meaning, Mahamati, is attained from much learning, and
this much learning, Mahamati, means to be conversant with meaning and
not with words. To be conversant with meaning means [to ascertain] the
view which is not at all associated with any philosophical school and
which will keep not only yourself but others from falling into [the false
views]. Being so, Mahamati, this is said to be learned much in meaning.
Therefore, let seekers for meaning reverently approach those [who are
much learned in it], but those who are attached to words as being in

accord with meaning, they are to be left to themselves and to be
shunned by truth-seekers.

Further, Mahamati to whom the Buddha's spiritual powers were added,
said: There is nothing specially distinguishable in the Buddha's teaching
of no-birth and no-annihilation. Why? Because all the philosophers also
declare, Bhagavan, their causes to be unborn and not to be annihilated;
and you, too, Bhagavan, declare space, Aprati-samkhyanirodha
(annihilation), and Nirvana to be unborn and not to be annihilated. The
philosophers declare, Bhagavan, that the world rises from causal
agencies and causation, while the Bhagavan too declares that the world
takes its rise from ignorance, desire, deed, discrimination, which work
in accordance with the law of causation. Both thus refer to causation,
the difference being in names only.
So with the rise of external objects, both you and they assume external
causation. Thus, there is no distinction between your teaching,
Bhagavan, and that of the philosophers. [With them] there are nine
substances which are regarded as unborn and not to be annihilated:
atoms, supreme soul (pradhana), ISvara, creator (prajapati), etc., while,
Bhagavan, you assert that all things are neither born nor annihilated as
their being and non-being is unattainable. Now as the elements are
indestructible, their self-nature is neither born nor annihilated; while
following various courses of transformation, what constitutes their
essential nature is not abandoned. Though your notion of the elements
may differ in form, Bhagavan, it is what has been imagined by all the
philosophers as well as by yourself. For this reason this teaching of
yours has nothing distinctive. If there is anything distinctive by which the
teaching of the Tathagata excels that of the philosophers, pray tell me.
Bhagavan, if there is nothing distinctive in your own teaching, we can
say that there is something of Buddhahood in the teaching of all the
philosophers, because in them there is a cause pointing to no-birth and
no-annihilation. It was declared by the Bhagavan that many Tathagatas
are not born simultaneously in the same district in one world. But if the
rule of cause and effect with regard to being and non-being holds true,

and your own teaching leaves nothing contradicting behind, there must
be many Tathagatas [rising at the same time and in the same locality].
The Bhagavan said: Mahamati, my [teaching of] no-birth and noannihilation is not like that of philosophers who also speak of no-birth
and no-annihilation; nor is it like their doctrine of birth and
impermanency. Why? Because, Mahamati, that to which the
philosophers ascribe the characteristics of no-birth and no-change is the
self-nature of all things. But mine is not that which falls into the dualism
of being and non-being. Mine, Mahamati, goes beyond the dualism of
being and non-being; has nothing to do with birth, abiding, and
destruction; is neither existent nor non-existent. How is it not nonexistent? Because multitudinousness of objects is to be seen as like
Maya and a dream; I say that it is not non-existent. How is it not
existent? Because there are no characteristic signs to be perceived as
belonging to the self-nature of things; they are seen [in one sense as
individual objects] and not seen [as such in another sense]; again they
are [something in one sense] graspable [and in another sense]
ungraspable. For this reason, things are existent and non-existent.
But when it is understood that there is nothing in the world but what is
seen of the Mind itself, discrimination no more rises, and one is thus
established in his own abode which is the realm of no-work. The
ignorant work and discriminate but not the wise. Mahamati, [the doings
of the ignorant] are unrealities discriminated, realities confounded; they
are like the city of the Gandharvas, like magically-created figures. To
illustrate, Mahamati, here is a city of the Gandharvas where children see
magically-created people, merchants, and many others, going in or
coming out, and imagine that they are really people going in and coming
out. It is owing to this discrimination characterised by perturbation that
such takes place. It is the same, Mahamati, with the ignorant that they
have a confused perception of birth and no-birth. There is really nothing
made or unmade, like the rising of magically-created people; for
magically-created people are neither born nor annihilated, because here
is no question whatever as to their existence or non-existence. In like
manner, all things have nothing to do with birth and destruction, except

that the ignorant cherishing false ideas imagine the birth and annihilation
of objects. It is, however, not so with the wise. By false ideas it is meant
that objects are not judged as they are in themselves. They are nothing
else. When [reality] is discriminated other than it is, there is the clinging
to the idea that all things have their self-nature and what is alone by itself
is not seen, and when what is alone by itself is not seen there is no
disappearance of discrimination. For this reason, Mahamati, an insight
into formlessness excels, and not an insight into form; as form causes
another birth, it excels not. By formlessness, Mahamati, is meant the
disappearance of discrimination.
No-birth and no-annihilation,1 this I call Nirvana. By Nirvana,
Mahamati, is meant the looking into the abode of reality as it really is in
itself; and when, along with the turning-back of the entire system of
mentation (citta-caitta-kalapa), there is the attainment of self-realisation
by means of noble wisdom, which belongs to the Tathagatas, I call it
Nirvana.

So it is said:
86. In order to remove [the notion of] birth and to accomplish [that of]
no-birth, I teach the doctrine of no-cause; but this is not understood by
the ignorant.
87. This all is unborn, but that does not mean that there are no objects;
they are seen to be like the city of the Gandharvas, a dream, and Maya;
objects are here, but causeless.
88. Tell me how things are unborn, without self-nature1 and empty.
When things are seen by [transcendental] knowledge, they are not
subject to combination and are unobtainable; therefore, I declare that
they are empty, unborn, and without self-nature.

89. Considered one by one combination is there, the world appears to
exist, but nothing is really existing; it is not as it is conceived by the
philosophers; when combination is dissolved, nothing is left to be seen.
90. As is a dream, a hair-net, Maya, the city of the Gandharvas, and a
mirage, which rise into view causelessly, so is the multitudinousness of
the world.
91. By keeping down the theory of no-causation,2 no-birth is
demonstrated; when the theory of no-birth is declared, my law-eye3 is
never destroyed; when the theory of no-cause is pointed out, the
philosophers are horrified.
92. [Mahamati asked].4 How, by whom, where, and wherefore does
the theory of no-cause make its appearance? [The Bhagavan
answered.]4 When things (samskrita) are perceived as neither subject
to causation nor above it, then the view maintained by the philosophers
of birth and destruction is done away with.
93. [Mahamati asked;] Is non-being no-birth? or does it look for
causation? or is it a being's name without a [corresponding] reality?
Pray tell me.
94. [The Bhagavan answered,] Non-being is not no-birth, nor does it
look for causation, nor is it a being's name, nor is it a name without a
[corresponding] object.
95. Here is a reality which does not belong to the Sravakas,
Pratyekabuddhas, nor to the philosophers; neither does it belong to the
Bodhisattvas who have entered upon the seventh stage; this is what
characterises no-birth.
96. The doing away with the notion of cause and condition, the giving
up of a causal agency, the establishment of the Mind-only--this I state
to be no-birth.

97. The getting-rid of [the idea that] things are caused, the removal of
[the dualism of] imagined and imagining, the being liberated from the
alternatives of being and non-being--this I state to be no-birth.
98. The mind liberated from its objective world, the getting-rid of the
twofold Svabhava [parikalpita and paratantra], a turning-up at the seat
of mentation--this I state to be no-birth.
99. No external existence, no non-existence, not even the grasping of
mind; [things are like] a dream, a hair-net, Maya, [the city of]
Gandharvas, a mirage;1 the abandonment of all the philosophical views,
--this is what characterises no-birth.
100. Thus too all these words will be understood, that is, emptiness,
having no self-nature, etc.; [the world] is empty, not, indeed, because of
its being empty, but because of its being empty in the sense of being
unborn.
101. A system [of mentality] may have its rise and fall owing to
causation; when there is a dissolution of the system, there is neither birth
nor annihilation.
102. When a dissolution somewhere takes place among the members of
the system, such existence ceases as is discriminated by the
philosophers by means of [such categories as] oneness and
separateness.
103. Nothing is born; being is not, non-being is not, nowhere is beingand-non-being; except that where there is a system, there is the rising of
things and their dissolution.
104. It is only in accordance with general convention that a chain2 of
mutual dependence is talked of; birth has no sense when the chain of
dependence is severed.

105. As there is nothing generating, there is no-birth, free from the faults
of the philosophers; I talk of this conventionally according [to the theory
of] concatenation, and this is not intelligible to the ignorant.
106. If there is anything born somewhere apart from concatenation,
here is one who is to be recognized as an advocate of no-causation as
he destroys concatenation.
107. If concatenation works [from outside] like a lamp revealing all
kinds of things, this means the presence of something outside
concatenation itself.
108. All things are devoid of self-nature, have never been born, and in
their original nature are like the sky; things separated from
concatenation belong to the discrimination of the ignorant.
109. There is another kind of no-birth which is the self-essence of things
realised by the wise; its birth is no-birth, and in this no-birth there is a
recognition.1
110. When this entire world is regarded as concatenation, as nothing
else but concatenation, then the mind gains tranquillity.
111. Ignorance, desire, karma, etc. --these are the inner concatenation;
a ladle, clay, a vessel, a wheel, etc., or seeds, the elements, etc. --these
are external concatenations.
112. If there is any other existence born of concatenation, this goes
against the law of concatenation; those [who hold this view] are not
established in the principles of correct reasoning.
113. If there is an object coming to exist and yet is non-existent, by
what law of causation is there the recognition of it? Things here are of
mutual origination, and for this reason causation is declared.

114. Heat, fluidity, motility, solidity--such notions are discriminated by
the ignorant; there is a system of relations, no individual objects exist;
hence the denial of self-nature [as constituting the realness of objects].
115. The physician varies his treatment according to diseases though
there is no difference in the principle [of healing]; the difference comes
from varieties of diseases.
116. In like manner, [in order to save] generations of beings from their
disease of passions with which they are ill, I teach people with my
doctrines, knowing the power of their senses.
117. My doctrine does not vary, but the passions and powers are
differentiated; there is just one vehicle; auspicious is the eightfold path.

At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said this to
the Bhagavan: Impermanence, impermanence--this is the discrimination
of the philosophers, Bhagavan, and you, too, declare in the canonical
texts that all composite things are impermanent, to be subject to birth
and destruction is the nature of things; but, Bhagavan, is this right or
wrong? And how many kinds of impermanency [are there], Bhagavan?
Said the Bhagavan: Mahamati, there are eight1 kinds of impermanency
as discriminated by the philosophers, but not by me. What are the eight
kinds? (1) Some say that there is origination and then cessation--this is
impermanency: that is to say, Mahamati, in the beginning there is
something born which ceases to exist--this is impermanency. (2) Some
explain impermanency as the changing of shape. (3) Some say, form2
itself is impermanent. (4) Some regard impermanency to consist in the
changing of form (rupa), saying that in a continuous, uninterrupted
existence of all things there takes place a change in their natural flavour;
for instance, milk going through a transformation turns into sour milk,
and that such an invisible decomposition happens to all things; this is
called impermanency. (5) Some imagine that there is an objective
existence (bhava) which is called impermanency. (6) Some imagine that

existence and non-existence--this is impermanency. (7) Some say that
not being born is impermanency; because of all things being
impermanent, and because of impermanency being inherent in them.
Now, Mahamati, by impermanency that exists in existence and nonexistence, is meant that things made of the elements1 are by nature
subject to destruction and have nothing in them one can take hold of,
while the elements themselves are never set in motion.
By impermanency that is no-birth is meant that there is neither
permanency nor impermanency; that in all things there is no [dualistic]
evolution of being and non-being, and that nothing is seen to exist, even
when they are examined into the last atom. This not seeing of anything is
another name for no-birth, and not for birth. This, Mahamati, is the
nature of impermanency that is no-birth, and as this is not understood,
all the philosophers cherish the view of impermanency that is based on
birth.
Further, Mahamati, by the conception of impermanency as objective
existence is meant that there is a discrimination in [the philosopher's]
own mind as to that which is not permanent and that which is not
impermanent. What is the sense of this? It means that there is a thing
called impermanency which in itself is not subject to destruction, but by
whose working there is the disappearance of all things; and if not for
impermanency there will be no disappearance of all things. It is like a
stick or a stone, or like a hammer breaking other things to pieces while
itself remains unbroken. [This is the philosopher's meaning but] as we
actually see things about us, there is no such mutual differentiation which
compels us to say that here is impermanency the cause, and there is the
disappearance of all things as the effect; there is no such differentiation
of cause and effect, and we cannot say: Here is impermanency as cause
and there is the effect. When there is thus no differentiation of cause and
effect, all things are permanent since no cause exists to render them
otherwise. Mahamati, as to the disappearance of all things, there is a
cause, but it is not in the understanding of the ignorant and simpleminded. When the cause is of a dissimilar nature, the [same] effect is not

produced. In case it does, the impermanency of all things is an example
of dissimilar effect, and there is no distinction between cause and effect.
But the distinction between cause and effect is observed in them. If
there is an [objective] existence to be known as impermanence, it will
be characterized with the nature of an effect-producing cause, and there
will be one entity contained in all things. When the notion is cherished of
a cause-producing effect, this means that impermanence the cause is
impermanent because it partakes of the nature of the effect which is
impermanent. All things then are not to be regarded as impermanent but
as permanent.
If impermanency [as the cause] resides within all things, it will come
under the three divisions of time. It passes away together with things
past; its future is not yet here as things of the future are still unborn; in
the present it breaks up together with things of the present.
Form [or matter] results from the combination and variation of the
elements; as the primary elements and the secondary elements are
neither different nor not-different, they are by nature not subject to
destruction, because according to the philosophers the elements are
indestructible. [But, Mahamati,] it is an established fact that the entire
triple world with its elements primary and secondary is born, abides,
and disappears. How do the philosophers conceive a separate
existence of impermanency which is independent of the elements
primary and secondary, while the elements themselves are neither set in
motion nor destroyed because they cling to the notion of self-nature [as
eternally unchangeable]?
The conception of impermanency as existing in the first origination which
ceases to continue [is not tenable for three reasons]; the elements
cannot produce one another, because each has its self-nature different
from the others. Each individual one cannot produce itself because there
is no differentiation in it. The [mutually] separated origination of the
elements is impossible because there is no correspondence between the
two. Hence the conclusion that the conception of originationimpermanency is untenable.

By the conception of impermanency in consideration of changes taking
place in external form is meant that the elements primary and secondary
are not subject to dissolution. What is known as dissolution, Mahamati,
even when closely examined until atoms are reached, is not the
destruction of the elements primary and secondary but of their external
forms whereby the elements assume different appearances as short or
long; but, in fact, nothing is destroyed in the elemental atoms. What is
seen as ceased to exist is the external formation of the elements. This
view is cherished by the Samkhya school.
By the impermanency of external shapes is meant the impermanency of
form (rupa); what is impermanent is thus the external shape and not the
elements. If the elements themselves are impermanent all our everyday
experiences come to naught. This is cherishing the view of the
Lokayatika, according to which all things are reducible to mere words
because their self-nature is never seen as born.
By the impermanency of changes is meant the changing of forms (rupa)
and not the changing of the elements themselves as is seen in various
ornamental articles of gold which assume various forms. While there is
no disappearance in the nature of gold, the ornamental articles variously
change in form.
These and other views of impermanency as changes are discriminated
variously by the philosophers as is here described. Fire may burn all the
elements but their self-nature can never be burned; when each goes
asunder by itself, there is the destruction of what constitutes the
elements primary and secondary.
However, Mahamati, I am neither for permanency nor for
impermanency. Why? For these reasons: external objects are not
admitted; the triple world is taught as not being anything else but the
Mind itself; multiplicities of external existences are not accepted; there is
no rising of the elements, nor their disappearance, nor their continuation,
nor their differentiation; there are no such things as the elements primary

and secondary; because of discrimination there evolve the dualistic
indications of perceived and perceiving; when it is recognized that
because of discrimination there is a duality, the discussion concerning
the existence and non-existence of the external world ceases because
Mind-only is understood. Discrimination rises from discriminating a
world of effect-producing works; no discrimination takes place when
this world is not recognized.1 Then a man ceases to cherish the
discrimination of existence and non-existence which rises out of his own
mind, he sees that things, either of this world or of a higher world, or of
the highest, are not to be described as permanent or impermanent,
because he does not understand the truth that there is nothing in the
world but what is seen of the Mind itself. As [the meaning of]
discrimination is not understood by all the philosophers who have fallen
into wrong ideas of dualism and who are people of no [spiritual]
attainment, impermanency comes up to them as a subject for discussion.
Mahamati,2 the triple aspect of all things as distinguished as of this
world, of a higher world, and of the highest, is the outcome of worddiscrimination, but this is not understood by the ignorant and simpleminded. So it is said:
118. By the deluded philosophers the notion of impermanency is
discriminated as origination-cessation, as transformation of external
forms, as an [independent] existence, as form.
119. There is no destruction of things; the elements abide for ever as
regards their self-essence; immersed in varieties of views the
philosophers discriminate impermanency.
120. To these philosophers there is no destruction, no birth; the
elements are permanent as regards their self-essence; who ever
discriminates impermanency? [This is the position of the philosophers.]
121. [According to the Buddha,] there is nothing in the world but the
Mind itself, and all that is of duality has its rise from the Mind and is
seen as perceived and perceiving; an ego-soul and what belongs to it-they exist not.

122. The abode and realm of Brahma, etc. --I declare all to be of
Mind-only, outside Mind-only, Brahma, etc., are not attainable.
(End of Chapter 3)





Chapter 4: On Intuitive Understanding

At that time again Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said this to the
Bhagavan: Pray tell me, Bhagavan, about the state of perfect
tranquillisation (nirodha) and its further development as attained by all
the Bodhisattvas, Sravakas, and Pratyekabuddhas; for when this further
development is thoroughly understood by myself and other BodhisattvaMahasattvas all may be saved from being confounded by the happiness
which comes from the attainment of perfect tranquillisation and also
from falling into the confused state of mind of the Sravakas,
Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers.
Said the Bhagavan: Then listen well and reflect well within yourself; I
will tell you.
Certainly, Bhagavan, said Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva and
gave ear to the Bhagavan.
The Bhagavan said this to him: Those Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas who
have reached the sixth stage as well as all the Sravakas and
Pratyekabuddhas attain perfect tranquillisation. At the seventh stage, the
Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas, giving up the view of self-nature as subsisting
in all things, attain perfect tranquillisation in every minute of their mental
lives, which is not however the case with the Sravakas and
Pratyekabuddhas; for with them there is something effect-producing,
and in their attainment of perfect tranquillisation there is a trace [of
dualism], of grasped and grasping. Therefore, they do not attain perfect
tranquillisation in every minute of their mental lives which is possible at
the seventh stage. They cannot attain to [the clear conviction of] an

undifferentiated state of all things and the cessation of [all] multiplicities.
Their attainment is due to understanding the aspect of all things in which
their self-nature is discriminated as good and as not-good. Therefore,
until the seventh stage there is not a well-established attainment of
tranquillisation in every minute of their mental lives.
Mahamati, at the eighth stage the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas, Sravakas,
and Pratyekabuddhas cease cherishing discriminative ideas that arise
from the Citta, Mana and ManoVijnana. From the first stage up to the
sixth, they perceive that the triple world is no more than the Citta.
Manas, and ManoVijnana, that as it is born of a discriminating mind
there is no ego-soul and what belongs to it, and that there is no falling
into the multitudinousness of external objects except through [the
discrimination of] the Mind itself. The ignorant turning their selfknowledge (svajnana) towards the dualism of grasped and grasping fail
to understand, for there is the working of habit-energy which has "been
accumulating since beginningless time owing to false reasoning and
discrimination.
Mahamati, at the eighth stage there is Nirvana for the Sravakas and
Pratyekabuddhas and Bodhisattvas; but the Bodhisattvas are kept away
by the power of all the Buddhas1 from [being intoxicated by] the bliss
of the Samadhi, and thereby they will not enter into Nirvana. When the
stage of Tathagatahood is not fulfilled there would be the cessation of all
doings, and if [the Bodhisattvas] were not supported [by the Buddhas]
the Tathagata-family would become extinct. Therefore, the Buddhas,
the Bhagavans, point out the virtues of Buddhahood which are beyond
conception. Therefore, [the Bodhisattvas] do not enter into Nirvana, but
the Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas, engrossed in the bliss of the
Samadhis, therein cherish the thought of Nirvana.
At the seventh stage, Mahamati, the Bodhisattva properly examines into
the nature of the Citta, Manas, and ManoVijnana; he examines into
[such subjects as] ego-soul and what belongs1 to it, grasped and
grasping, the egolessness of persons and things, rising and disappearing,
individuality and generality; he skilfully ascertains the fourfold logical

analysis; he enjoys the bliss of self-mastery; he enters successively upon
the stages; he knows the differences obtaining in the various elements of
enlightenment. The grading of the stages is arranged by me lest the
Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, not knowing what is meant by individuality
and generality and failing to understand the continuous development of
the successive stages, should fall into the philosophers' wrong way of
viewing things. But, Mahamati, there is really nothing rising, nothing
disappearing, all is nothing except what is seen of the Mind itself; that is,
the continuous development of the successive stages and all the multiple
doings of the triple world [¡ªthey are all of Mind itself]. This is not
understood by the ignorant. I and all the Buddhas1 establish the
doctrine of the stages which develop successively as do all the doings of
the triple world.
Further, Mahamati, the Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas at the eighth
stage of Bodhisattvahood are so intoxicated with the happiness that
comes from the attainment of perfect tranquillisation, and, failing to
understand fully that there is nothing in the world but what is seen of the
Mind itself, they are thus unable to overcome the hindrances and habitenergy growing out of their notions of generality and individuality; and
adhering to the egolessness of persons and things and cherishing views
arising therefrom, they have the discriminating idea and knowledge of
Nirvana, which is not that of the truth of absolute solitude. Mahamati,
when the Bodhisattvas face and perceive the happiness of the Samadhi
of perfect tranquillisation, they are moved with the feeling of love and
sympathy owing to their original vows, and they become aware of the
part they are to perform as regards the [ten] inexhaustible vows. Thus,
they do not enter Nirvana. But the fact is that they are already in
Nirvana because in them there is no rising of discrimination. With them
the discrimination of grasped and grasping no more takes place; as they
[now] recognise that there is nothing in the world but what is seen of the
Mind itself, they have done away with the thought of discrimination
concerning all things. They have abandoned adhering to and
discriminating about such notions as the Citta, Manas, and
ManoVijnana, and external objects, and self-nature; however, they
have not given up the things promoting the cause of Buddhism; because

of their attainment of the inner insight which belongs to the stage of
Tathagatahood; whatever they do all issues from their transcendental
knowledge.
It is like a man crossing a stream in a dream. For instance, Mahamati,
suppose that while sleeping a man dreams that he is in the midst of a
great river which he earnestly endeavours with all his might to cross by
himself; but before he succeeds in crossing the stream, he is awakened
from the dream, and being awakened he thinks: "Is this real or unreal?"
He thinks again: "No, it is neither real nor unreal. By reason of the habitenergy of discrimination which has been accumulated by experience
ever since beginningless time, as multiplicities of forms and conditions
are seen, heard, thought, and recognised, there is the perception and
discrimination of all things as existent and nonexistent; and for this
reason my ManoVijnana experiences even in a dream all that has been
seen by myself."
In the same way, Mahamati, the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas of the eighth
stage of Bodhisattvahood, after passing through the first up to the
seventh stage, observe that "there is no more rising in them of
discrimination since all things are seen as like Maya, etc., when they
have an intuitive understanding of the [true] nature of all things, and
[further] observing that, therefore, there is the cessation of all things as
to grasped and grasping which rise from one's ardent desire for things,
and also observing how the mind and what belongs to it carry on their
discrimination, the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas never relax their efforts to
practise the teachings of the Buddhas. Mahamati, they will exercise
themselves to make those who have not yet attained the truth attain it.
For the Bodhisattvas, Nirvana does not mean extinction; as they have
abandoned thoughts of discrimination evolving from the Citta, Manas,
and ManoVijnana, there is for them the attainment of the recognition
that all things are unborn. And, Mahamati, in ultimate reality there is
neither gradation nor continuous succession; [only] the truth of absolute
solitude (viviktadharma) is taught here in which the discrimination of all
the images is quieted. So it is said:

1. The abodes and the stages of Buddhahood are established in1 the
Mind-only which is imageless¡ªthis was told, is told, and will be told by
the Buddhas.
2. The [first] seven stages are [still] of the mind, but here the eighth is
imageless; the two stages, [the ninth and the tenth,] have [still]
something to rest themselves on; the [highest] stage that is left belongs
to me.
3. Self-realisation and absolute purity¡ªthis stage is my own; it is the
highest station of MaheSvara, the Akanishtha [heaven] shining brilliantly.
4. Its rays of light move forward like a mass of fire; they who are brightcoloured, charming, and auspicious transform the triple world.
5. Some worlds are being transformed, while others have already been
transformed;2 there I preach the various vehicles which belong to my
own stage.
6. But [from the absolute point of view] the tenth is the first, and the first
is the eighth; and the ninth is the seventh, and the seventh is the eighth.
7. And the second is the third, and the fourth is the fifth, and the third is
the sixth; what gradation is there where imagelessness prevails?
(End of Chapter 4)





Chapter 5: On the Deduction of the Permanency and
Impermanency of Tathagatahood
At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said this to
the Bhagavan: Is the Bhagavan, the Tathagata, the Arhat, the FullyEnlightened One, permanent or impermanent?
Said the Bhagavan: Mahamati, the Tathagata is neither permanent nor
impermanent. Why? Because either way there is a fault connected with
it. Mahamati, what fault is connected with either assertion? If the
Tathagata is permanent, he will be connected with the creating agencies.
For, Mahamati, according to all the philosophers the creating agencies
are something uncreated and permanent. But the Tathagata is not
permanent [in the same sense] as the uncreated are permanent. If he is
impermanent, he will be connected with things created. Because the
Skandhas which are predicable as qualified and qualifying are
nonexistent, and because the Skandhas are subject to annihilation,
destructibility is their nature. Mahamati, all that is created is
impermanent as is a jug, a garment, straw, a piece of wood, a brick,
etc., which are all connected with impermanency. Thus all the
preparations for the knowledge of the All-Knowing One will become
useless as they are things created. On account of no distinction being
made, the Tathagata, indeed, would be something created. For this
reason, the Tathagata is neither permanent nor impermanent.
Again, Mahamati, the Tathagata is not permanent for the reason that [if
he were] he would be like space, and the preparations one makes for
Tathagatahood would be useless. That is to say, Mahamati, space is
neither permanent nor impermanent as it excludes [the idea of]
permanence and impermanence, and it is improper to speak of it as

characterised with the faults of oneness and otherness, of bothness and
not-bothness, of permanence and impermanence. Further, Mahamati, it
is like the horns of a hare, or a horse, or an ass, or a camel, or a frog,
or a snake, or a fly, or a fish; [with the Tathagata] as with them here is
the permanency of no-birth. Because of this fault of the permanency of
no-birth, the Tathagata cannot be permanent.
However, Mahamati, there is another sense in which the Tathagata can
be said to be permanent. How? Because the knowledge arising from
the attainment of enlightenment [ = an intuitive understanding] is of a
permanent nature, the Tathagata is permanent. Mahamati, this
knowledge, as it is attained intuitively by the Tathagatas, Arhats, FullyEnlightened Ones, is, indeed, permanent. Whether the Tathagatas are
born or not, this Dharmata, which is the regulative and sustaining
principle to be discoverable in the enlightenment of all the Sravakas,
Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers, abides, and this sustaining principle
of existence is not like the emptiness of space, which, however, is not
understood by the ignorant and simple-minded. Mahamati, this
knowledge of enlightenment belonging to the Tathagatas comes forth
from transcendental knowledge (prajnajnana); Mahamati, the
Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones do not come forth from the
habit-energy of ignorance which is concerned with the Citta, Manas,
and ManoVijnana, and the Skandhas, Dhatus, and ayatanas. The triple
world originates from the discriminating of unrealities, but the Tathagatas
do not originate from the discriminating of unrealities. Where duality
obtains, Mahamati, there is permanency and impermanency because of
its not being one. Mahamati, [the truth of] absolute solitude is, indeed,
non-dualistic1 because all things are characterised with non-duality and
no-birth. For this reason, Mahamati, the Tathagatas, Arhats, FullyEnlightened Ones are neither permanent nor impermanent. Mahamati,
as long as there is word-discrimination, there follows the faulty notion of
permanency and impermanency. The destruction of the notion of
permanency and impermanency as held by the ignorant, Mahamati,
comes from the getting rid of the knowledge that is based on
discrimination, and not from the getting rid of the knowledge that is
based on the insight of solitude. So it is said:

1. By keeping away permanency and impermanency, [and yet] by
keeping permanency and impermanency in sight, those who always see
the Buddhas will not expose themselves to the power of the
philosophical doctrines.
2. When permanency and impermanency are adhered to all the
accumulation [one makes for the attainment of reality] will be of no
avail; by destroying the knowledge that is based on discrimination, [the
idea of] permanency and impermanency is kept back.
3. As soon as an assertion is made, all is in confusion; when it is
understood that there is nothing in the world but what is seen of the
Mind itself, disputes never arise.
(Ends of Chapter 5)





Chapter 6: On Momentariness

At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva made a
request of the Bhagavan, saying: Bhagavan, tell me; Sugata, tell me
about the rising and disappearing of the Skandhas, Dhatus, and
ayatanas. In case there is no ego-soul, what is it that comes to exist and
to disappear? The ignorant who are attached to the notion of rising and
disappearing, fail to understand the extinction of pain, and thus they
know not what Nirvana is.
Said the Bhagavan: Then, Mahamati, listen well and reflect well within
yourself; I will tell you.
Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said: Certainly, Bhagavan; and
gave ear to the Bhagavan.
The Bhagavan said this to him: Mahamati, the Tathagata-garbha holds
within it the cause for both good and evil, and by it all the forms of
existence are produced. Like an actor it takes on a variety of forms,
and [in itself] is devoid of an ego-soul and what belongs to it. As this is
not understood, there is the functioning together of the triple
combination from which effects take place. But the philosophers not
knowing this are tenaciously attached to the idea of a cause [or a
creating agency]. Because of the influence of habit-energy that has been
accumulating variously by false reasoning since beginningless time, what
here goes under the name of alayaVijnana is accompanied by the seven
Vijnanas which give birth to a state known as the abode of ignorance. It
is like a great ocean in which the waves roll on permanently but the
[deeps remain unmoved; that is, the Alaya-] body itself subsists

uninterruptedly, quite free from fault of impermanence, unconcerned
with the doctrine of ego-substance, and thoroughly pure in its essential
nature.
As to the other seven Vijnanas beginning with the Manas and
ManoVijnana, they have their rise and complete ending from moment to
moment; they are born with false discrimination as cause, and with
forms and appearances and objectivity as conditions which are
intimately linked together; adhering to names and forms, they do not
realise that objective individual forms are no1 more than what is seen of
the Mind itself; they do not give exact information regarding pleasure
and pain; they are not the cause of emancipation; by setting up names
and forms which originate from greed, greed is begotten in turn, thus
mutually conditioned and conditioning. When the sense-organs which
seize [upon the objective world] are destroyed and annihilated, the
other things immediately cease to function, and there is no recognition of
pleasure and pain which are the self-discrimination of knowledge; thus
there is the attainment of perfect tranquillisation in which thoughts and
sensations are quieted, or there is the realisation of the four Dhyanas, in
which truths of emancipation are well understood; whereupon the
Yogins are led to cherish herein the notion of [true] emancipation,
because of the not-rising [of the Vijnanas].
[But] when a revulsion [or turning-back] has not taken place in the
alayaVijnana known under the name of Tathagata-garbha, there is no
cessation of the seven evolving Vijnanas. Why? Because the evolution
of the Vijnanas is depending on this cause; but this does not belong to
the realm of the Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and those who are
disciplining themselves in the exercises of the philosophers. As they
[only] know the egolessness of the self-soul, as they [only] accept the
individuality and generality of the Skandhas, Dhatus, and ayatanas, there
is the evolving of the Tathagata-garbha. When an insight into the five
Dharmas, the three Svabhavas, and the egolessness of all things is
obtained, the Tathagata-garbha becomes quiescent. By causing a
revulsion in the continuous development of the graded stages, [the
Bodhisattva] may not be led astray in the path [of enlightenment] by

those philosophers who hold different views. Thus establishing himself at
the Bodhisattva stage of Acala (immovable), he obtains the paths
leading to the happiness of the ten Samadhis. Supported by the
Buddhas in Samadhi, observing the truths of the Buddha which go
beyond thought and his own original vows, not entering into the
happiness of the Samadhi which is the limit of reality, but by means of
the self-realisation which is not generally gained by the paths of
discipline belonging to the Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and
philosophers, he obtains the ten paths of discipline which belong to the
noble family [of the Tathagatas], and [also obtains] the knowledgebody created by the will which is removed from the [premeditated]
workings of Samadhi. For this reason, Mahamati, let those BodhisattvaMahasattvas who are seeking after the exalted truth effect the
purification of the Tathagata-garbha which is known as alayaVijnana.
Mahamati, if you say that there is no Tathagata-garbha known as
alayaVijnana, there will be neither the rising nor the disappearing [of an
external world of multiplicities] in the absence of the Tathagata-garbha
known as alayaVijnana. But, Mahamati, there is the rising and
disappearing of the ignorant as well as the holy ones. [Therefore], the
Yogins, while walking in the noble path of self-realisation and abiding in
the enjoyment of things as they are, do not abandon working hard and
are never frustrated [in their undertakings]. Mahamati, this realm of the
Tathagata-garbha is primarily undefiled and is beyond all the speculative
theories of the Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers; but it
appears to them devoid of purity, as it is soiled by these external
defilements. This is not the case with the Tathagatas, Mahamati; with the
Tathagatas it is an intuitive experience as if it were an amalaka fruit held
in the palm of the hand.
This, Mahamati, was told by me in the canonical text relating to Queen
Sr¨©mala, and in another where the Bodhisattvas, endowed with subtle,
fine, pure knowledge, are supported [by my spiritual powers] ¡ªthat the
Tathagata-garbha known as alayaVijnana evolves together with the
seven Vijnanas. This is meant for the Sravakas who are not free from
attachment, to make them see into the egolessness of things; and for

Queen Sr¨©mala to whom the Buddha's spiritual power was added, the
[pure] realm of Tathagatahood was expounded. This does not belong to
the realm of speculation as it is carried on by the Sravakas,
Pratyekabuddhas, and other philosophers, except, Mahamati, that this
realm of Tathagatahood which is the realm of the Tathagata-garbhaalayaVijnana is meant for those Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas who like you
are endowed with subtle, fine, penetrating thought-power and whose
understanding is in accordance with the meaning; and it is not for others,
such as philosophers, Sravakas, and Pratyekabuddhas, who are
attached to the letters of the canonical texts. For this reason, Mahamati,
let you and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas discipline yourselves in the
realm of Tathagatahood, in the understanding of this Tathagata-garbhaalayaVijnana, so that you may not rest contented with mere learning. So
it is said:
1. The Garbha of the Tathagatas is indeed united with the seven
Vijnanas; when this is adhered to, there arises duality, but when rightly
understood, duality ceases.
2. The mind, which is the product of intellection since beginningless
time, is seen like a mere image; when things are viewed as they are in
themselves, there is neither objectivity nor its appearance.
3. As the ignorant grasp the finger-tip and not the moon, so those who
cling to the letter, know not my truth.
4. The Citta dances like a dancer; the Manas resembles a jester; the
[Mano-] Vijnana together with the five [Vijnanas] creates an objective
world which is like a stage.1

At that time, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva made a request of
the Bhagavan, saying: Pray tell me, Bhagavan; pray tell me, Sugata,
concerning the distinguishing aspects of the five Dharmas, the [three]
Svabhavas, the [eight] Vijnanas, and the twofold egolessness. By
[recognising] the distinguishing aspects of the twofold egolessness, I and

other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas will be able to establish those truths
while effecting a continuous development through the various stages of
Bodhisattvahood. It is said that by these truths we can enter into all the
Buddha-truths, and that by entering into all the Buddha-truths we can
enter even into the ground of the Tathagata's inner realisation.
Said the Bhagavan: Then, Mahamati, listen well and reflect well within
yourself; I will tell you.
Certainly, Bhagavan, said Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva and
gave ear to the Bhagavan.
The Bhagavan said this to him: Mahamati, I will tell you about the
distinguishing aspects of the five Dharmas, the [three] Svabhavas, the
[eight] Vijnanas, and the twofold egolessness. The five Dharmas are:
name, form, discrimination, right knowledge, and suchness. [When
these are thoroughly comprehended] by the Yogins, they enter into the
course of the Tathagata's inner realisation, where they are kept away
from such views as eternalism and nihilism, realism and negativism, and
where they come face to face with the abode of happiness belonging to
the present existence as well as to the Samapatti (tranquillisation). But,
Mahamati, as the ignorant do not understand that the five Dharmas, the
[three] Svabhavas, the [eight] Vijnanas, and the twofold egolessness,
together with the external objects which are regarded as existent and
nonexistent¡ª [all these are no more than] what is seen of the Mind
itself¡ªthey are given to discrimination, but it is otherwise with the wise.
Said Mahamati: How is it that the ignorant are given up to discrimination
and the wise are not?
Said the Bhagavan: Mahamati, the ignorant cling to names, ideas, and
signs; their minds move along [these channels]. As thus they move
along, they feed on multiplicities of objects, and fall into the notion of an
ego-soul and what belongs to it, and cling to salutary appearances. As
thus they cling, there is a reversion to ignorance, and they become
tainted, karma born of greed, anger, and folly is accumulated. As karma

is accumulated again and again, their minds become swathed in the
cocoon of discrimination as the silk-worm; and, transmigrating in the
ocean of birth-and-death (gati), they are unable, like the water-drawing
wheel, to move forward. And because of folly, they do not understand
that all things are like Maya, a mirage, the moon in water, and have no
self-substance to be imagined as an ego-soul and its belongings; that
things rise from their false discrimination; that they are devoid of
qualified and qualifying; and have nothing to do with the course of birth,
abiding, and destruction; that they are born of the discrimination of what
is only seen of the Mind itself; and assert1 that they are born of ISvara,
time, atoms, or a supreme spirit, for they follow names and
appearances. Mahamati, the ignorant move along with appearances.
Further, Mahamati, by "appearance" is meant that which reveals itself to
the visual sense and is perceived as form, and in like manner that which,
appearing to the sense of hearing, smelling, tasting, the body, and the
ManoVijnana, is perceived as sound, odour, taste, tactility, and idea,
¡ªall this I call "appearance."
Further, Mahamati, by "discrimination" is meant that by which names
are declared, and there is thus the indicating of [various] appearances.
Saying that this is such and no other, for instance, saying that this is an
elephant, a horse, a wheel, a pedestrian, a woman, or a man, each idea
thus discriminated is so determined.
Further, Mahamati, by "right knowledge" is meant this: when names and
appearances are seen as unobtainable owing to their mutual
conditioning, there is no more rising of the Vijnanas, for nothing comes
to annihilation, nothing abides everlastingly; and when there is thus no
falling back into the stage of the philosophers, Sravakas, and
Pratyekabuddhas, it is said that there is right knowledge. Further,
Mahamati, by reason of this right knowledge, the BodhisattvaMahasattva does not regard name as reality and appearance as nonreality.

When erroneous views based on the dualistic notion of assertion and
negation are gotten rid of, and when the Vijnanas cease to rise as
regards the objective world of names and appearances, this I call
"suchness." Mahamati, a Bodhisattva-Mahasattva who is established on
suchness attains the state of imagelessness and thereby attains the
Bodhisattva-stage of Joy (pramudita).
When [the Bodhisattva] attains the stage of Joy, he is kept away from
all the evil courses belonging to the philosophers and enters upon the
path of supra-worldly truths. When [all] the conditions [of truth] are
brought to consummation, he discerns that the course of all things starts
with the notion of Maya, etc.; and after the attainment of the noble truth
of self-realisation, he earnestly desires to put a stop to speculative
theorisation; and going up in succession through the stages of
Bodhisattvahood he finally reaches the stage of Dharma-Cloud
(dharmamegha). After being at the stage of Dharma-Cloud, he reaches
as far as the stage of Tathagatahood where the flowers of the Samadhis,
powers, self-control, and psychic faculties are in bloom. After reaching
here, in order to bring all beings to maturity, he shines like the moon in
water, with varieties of rays of transformation. Perfectly fulfilling1 the
[ten] inexhaustible vows, he preaches the Dharma to all beings
according to their various understandings. As the BodhisattvaMahasattvas, Mahamati, have entered into suchness, they attain the
body which is free from the will and thought-constructions.2
Again, Mahamati said: Are the three Svabhavas to be regarded as
included in the five Dharmas, or as having their own characteristics
complete in themselves?
The Bhagavan said: The three Svabhavas, the eight Vijnanas, and the
twofold egolessness¡ªthey are all included [in the five Dharmas]. Of
these, name and appearance are known as the Parikalpita [false
imagination]. Then, Mahamati, discrimination which rises depending
upon them, is the notion of an ego-soul and what belongs to it, ¡ªthe
notion and the discrimination are of simultaneous occurrence, like the
rising of the sun and its rays. Mahamati, the discrimination thus

supporting the notion of self-nature which subsists in the multiplicities of
objects, is called the Paratantra [dependence on another]. Right
knowledge and suchness, Mahamati, are indestructible, and thus they
are known as Parinishpanna [perfect knowledge].
Further, Mahamati, by adhering to what is seen of the Mind itself there
is an eightfold discrimination. This comes from imagining unreal
individual appearances [as real]. When the twofold clinging to an egosoul and what belongs to it is stopped, there is the birth of the twofold
egolessness. Mahamati, in these five Dharmas are included all the
Buddha-truths and also the differentiation and succession of the
[Bodhisattva-] stages, and the entrance of the Sravakas,
Pratyekabuddhas, Bodhisattvas, and Tathagatas into the state of selfrealisation by means of their noble wisdom.

Further, Mahamati, of the five Dharmas¡ªname, appearance,
discrimination, right knowledge, and suchness¡ª appearance is that
which is seen as having such characteristics as form, shape, distinctive
features, images, colours, etc. ¡ªthis is "appearance." Out of this
appearance ideas are formed such as a jar, etc., by which one can say,
this is such and such, and no other; this is "name." When names are thus
pronounced, appearances are determined1 and there is "discrimination,
" saying this is mind and this is what belongs to it. That these names and
appearances are after all unobtainable because when intellection is put
away the aspect of mutuality [in which all things are determined] ceases
to be perceived and imagined¡ªthis is called the "suchness" of things.
And this suchness may be characterised as truth, reality, exact
knowledge, limit, source, self-substance, the unattainable. This has been
realised by myself and the Tathagatas, truthfully pointed out, recognised,
made public, and widely shown. When, in agreement with this, [the
truth] is rightly understood as neither negative nor affirmative,
discrimination ceases to rise, and there is a state conformable to selfrealisation by means of noble wisdom, which is not the course of
controversy pertaining to the philosophers, Sravakas, and
Pratyekabuddhas; this is "right knowledge."

These are, Mahamati, the five Dharmas, and in them are included the
three Svabhavas, the eight Vijnanas, the twofold egolessness, and all the
Buddha-truths. In this, Mahamati, reflect well with your own wisdom
and let others do [the same] and do not allow yourself to be led by
another. So it is said:
5. The five Dharmas, the Svabhavas, the eight Vijnanas, and the
twofold egolessness¡ªthey are all embraced in the Mahayana.
6. Name, appearance, and discrimination [correspond to] the first two
Svabhavas, while right knowledge and suchness are the Parinishpanna.

At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said this to
the Bhagavan: It is told by the Bhagavan in the canonical text the
Tathagatas of the past, present, and future are like the sands of the river
Ganga. Bhagavan, is this to be accepted literally? or is there another
distinct meaning? Pray tell me, Bhagavan.
The Bhagavan said: Mahamati, do not take it in its literal sense; for,
Mahamati, the Buddhas of the three divisions of time are not
measurable by the measurement of the sands of the Ganga. Why?
Because an analogy which is superior to anything of the world and
surpasses it cannot be called an analogy, since there is in it something
resembling and something not resembling. The Tathagatas, Arhats,
Fully-Enlightened Ones do not give out such an analogy that has in it
something resembling and something not resembling and that is superior
to the world and surpasses it. But this comparison is only given out,
Mahamati, by myself and the Tathagatas, in which the Tathagatas,
Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones are said to be like the sands of the river
Ganga; the idea is to terrify those ignorant and simple-minded ones
who, tenaciously clinging to the idea of permanency and impermanency,
and giving themselves up to the ways of thinking and the erroneous
views of the philosophers, follow up the wheel of transmigration. To

those who, anxious to escape the intricacies of the wheel of existence,
seek after the excellent state, thinking how this could be realised, it is
told them that the appearance of the Tathagatas is not like the blooming
of the Udumbara flower, because they will thereby see that the
attainment of Buddhahood is not a difficult undertaking and will pu1
forward their energy. But it is told in the canonical text that the
Tathagatas appear as rarely as the Udumbara flower, and this is in
consideration of those people who are to be led by me. Mahamati,
however, no one has ever seen the Udumbara flower blooming, nor will
anyone; while, Mahamati, the Tathagatas are at present in the world,
they were seen and are to be seen. To say that the Tathagatas appear
as rarely as the Udumbara flower has [really] no reference to the
establishment of the truth itself. When, Mahamati, the establishment of
the truth itself is pointed out, it surpasses beyond measure anything in
the world that can be offered as an analogy to it, because [the ignorant]
are incapable of believing. And thus there is an unbelief on the part of
the ignorant and simple-minded. There is indeed no room for analogies
to enter in the realm of self-realisation which is effected by means of
noble wisdom. The truth transcends all the notions that are characteristic
of the Citta, Manas, and ManoVijnana. The truth is the Tathagatas, and,
therefore, in them there is nothing describable by analogy.
But, Mahamati, [sometimes] a comparison is made use of; that is to say,
the Tathagatas are said to be like the sands of the river Ganga, because
they are the same and impartial [to all things], because they are free
from imagination and discrimination. For example, Mahamati, the sands
of the river Ganga are tossed about by the fishes, tortoises, porpoises,
crocodiles, buffalos, lions, elephants, etc., but they are free from
imagination and discrimination; for they do not resent, saying."We are
down-trodden," or "We are not." They are non-discriminative, pure in
themselves, separated from defilement. In the same way, Mahamati, the
self-realisation of noble wisdom which has been attained by the
Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones, is like the river Ganga, and
their powers, psychic faculties, and self-control are like the sands; and
however much they are tossed about by the fishes of the philosophers,
by the ignorant who belong to other schools, they are not troubled by

imaginations and discriminations. Because of their original vows, the
Tathagatas [whose hearts are] filled with all the happiness of the
Samapatti are not troubled by imaginations and discriminations with
regard to beings. Therefore, the Tathagatas, like the sands of the river
Ganga, are free from partiality because of their being devoid of likes
and dislikes.
To illustrate, Mahamati: as the sands of the river Ganga partake of the
character of the earth, the conflagration that will break out at the end of
the Kalpa may burn the earth but does not destroy its self-nature.
Mahamati, the earth is not consumed because of its being inseparably
connected with the element of fire, and it is only the ignorant and
simple-minded that on account of their falling into false ideas imagine the
earth being consumed by fire. But as it supplies the material cause to the
element fire, it is never consumed. In the same way, Mahamati, the
Dharmakaya of the Tathagatas, like the sands of the river Ganga, is
never destroyed.
To illustrate, Mahamati: the sands of the river Ganga are immeasurable.
In the same way, Mahamati, the rays of light of the Tathagatas are
beyond measure, which arc-emitted by them in all the Buddhaassemblies in order to bring beings to maturity and arouse them [to the
knowledge of the truth].
To illustrate, Mahamati: the sands of the river Ganga do not assume
another nature than itself remaining forever the same. In the same way,
Mahamati, the Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones are neither
evolving nor disappearing in transmigration because in them the cause of
making them come into existence is destroyed.
To illustrate, Mahamati: the sands of the river Ganga are unconcerned
whether they are carried away or whether more is added into them. In
the same way, Mahamati, the knowledge of the Tathagatas which is
exercised for the maturing of beings is neither exhausted nor augmented,
because the Dharma is without a physical body. Mahamati, that which

has a physical body is subject to annihilation, but not that which has no
physical body; and the Dharma is not a physical body.
To illustrate, Mahamati: the sands of the river Ganga, however much
they are compressed for the sake of the ghee and oil, are destitute of
them. In the same way, Mahamati, the Tathagatas never abandon their
deep concerns1 and original vows and happiness as regards the
Dharmadhatu, however hard they are oppressed with pain for the sake
of beings, as long as all beings have not yet been led into Nirvana by the
Tathagatas, who are endowed with a great compassionate heart.
To illustrate, Mahamati: the sands of the river Ganga are drawn along
with the flow of the stream, but not where there is no water. In the same
way, Mahamati, the Tathagata's teaching in regard to all the Buddhatruths takes place along the flow of the Nirvana-stream; and for this
reason the Tathagatas are said to be like the sands of the river Ganga.

Mahamati, in tathagata ("thus come") there is no sense of "going away";
Mahamati, "going away" means destruction. Mahamati, the primary limit
of transmigration is unknown. Not being known, how can I talk of the
sense of "gong away"? The sense of "going away," Mahamati, is
annihilation, and this is not known by the ignorant and simple-minded.
Mahamati said: If, Bhagavan, the primary limit of transmigration of all
beings is unknowable, how is the emancipation of beings knowable?
The Bhagavan said: Mahamati, when it is understood that the objective
world is nothing but what is seen of the Mind itself, the habit-energy of
false speculations and erroneous discriminations which have been going
on since beginningless time is removed, and there is a revulsion [or
turning-back] at the basis of discrimination¡ªthis is emancipation,
Mahamati, and not annihilation. Therefore, Mahamati, there cannot be
any talk about endlessness. To be endless in limit, Mahamati, is another
name for discrimination. Apart from discriminations there are no other
beings. When all things external or internal are examined with

intelligence, Mahamati, knowing and known are found to be quiescent.
But when it is not recognised that all things rise from the discrimination
of the Mind itself, discrimination asserts itself. When this is understood
discrimination ceases. So it is said:
7. Those who regard the removers of obstruction [i. e., Buddhas] as
neither destroyed nor departed for ever, like the sands of the Ganga,
see the Tathagata.
8. Like the sands of the Ganga they are devoid of all error: they flow
along the stream and are permanent, and so is the essence [or nature] of
Buddhahood.

At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said this to
the Bhagavan; Tell me, Bhagavan; tell me, Sugata, Tathagata, Arhat,
Fully-Enlightened One, regarding the momentary destruction of all things
and their distinctive signs. Bhagavan, what is meant by all things being
momentary?
The Bhagavan replied: Then, Mahamati, listen well and reflect well
within yourself; I will tell you.
Certainly, Bhagavan; said Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva and
gave ear to the Bhagavan.
The Bhagavan said this to him: Mahamati, all things, all things we speak
of, and they are good or bad, effect-producing or not effect-producing,
of this world or of super-world, faulty or faultless, of evil flowings or the
non-flowings, receptive or non-receptive. In short, Mahamati, the five
appropriating1 Skandhas have their rise from the habit-energy of the
Citta, Manas, and ManoVijnana, they are imagined good or bad.
Mahamati, the happiness of the Samadhi and the attainments [resulting
therefrom], which belong to the wise by reason of their abiding in the
happiness of the existing world, are called the non-outflowing goods.

Again, Mahamati, by good and bad are meant the eight Vijnanas. What
are the eight? They are the Tathagata-garbha known as the
alayaVijnana, Manas, ManoVijnana, and the system of the five Vijnanas
as described by the philosophers. Now, Mahamati, the system of the
five Vijnanas is together with the ManoVijnana, and there is an
undivided succession and differentiation of good and bad, and the entire
body moves on continuously and closely bound together; moving on, it
comes to an end; but as it fails to understand that there is nothing in the
world but what is seen of Mind-only, there is the rising of another
Vijnana [-system] following the cessation of the first; and the
ManoVijnana in union with the system of the five Vijnanas, perceiving
the difference of forms and figures, is set in motion, not remaining still
even for a moment¡ªthis I call momentariness. Mahamati, momentary is
the alayaVijnana known as the Tathagata-garbha, which is together with
the Manas and with the habit-energy of the evolving Vijnanas¡ª this is
momentary. But [the alayaVijnana which is together] with the habitenergy of the non-outflows (anasrava) is not momentary. This is not
understood by the ignorant and simple-minded who are addicted to the
doctrine of momentariness. Not understanding the momentariness and
non-momentariness of all things, they cherish nihilism whereby they even
try to destroy the unmade (asamskrita). Mahamati, the system itself of
the five Vijnanas is not subject to transmigration, nor does it suffer
pleasure and pain, nor is it conducive to Nirvana. But, Mahamati, the
Tathagata-garbha is together with the cause that suffers pleasure and
pain; it is this that is set in motion and ceases to work; it is stupefied by
the fourfold habit-energy. But the ignorant do not understand it, as their
thoughts are infused with the habit-energy of discrimination which
cherishes the view of momentariness.
Further, Mahamati, gold, vajra, and the relics of the Buddha, owing to
their specific character, are never destroyed but remain the same until
the end of time. If, Mahamati, the nature of enlightenment is momentary,
the wise would lose their wiseness (aryatva), but they have never lost it.
Mahamati, gold and vajra remain the same until the end of time;
remaining the same they are neither diminished nor increased. How is it

that the ignorant, failing to recognise the hidden meaning of all things
internal and external, discriminate in the sense of momentariness?

Further, Mahamati said: It is again said by the Bhagavan that by fulfilling
the six Paramitas Buddhahood is realised. What are the six Paramitas?
And how are they fulfilled?
The Bhagavan replied: Mahamati, there are three kinds of Paramitas.
What are the three? They are the worldly, the super-worldly, and the
highest super-wordly. Of these, Mahamati, the worldly Paramitas [are
practised thus]: Adhering tenaciously to the notion of an ego-soul and
what belongs to it and holding fast to dualism, those who are desirous
for this world of form, etc., will practise the Paramita of charity in order
to obtain the various realms of existence. In the same way, Mahamati,
the ignorant will practise the Paramitas of morality, patience, energy,
Dhyana, and Prajna. Attaining the psychic powers they will be born in
Brahma's heaven.
As to the super-worldly Paramitas, they are practised by the Sravakas
and Pratyekabuddhas whose thoughts are possessed by the notion of
Nirvana; the Paramitas of charity, etc. are thus performed by them,
who, like the ignorant, are desirous of enjoying Nirvana for themselves.
Again, Mahamati, as to the highest super-worldly Paramitas, [they are
practised] by the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas who are the practisers of
the highest form of spiritual discipline; that is, perceiving that there is
nothing in the world but what is only seen of the Mind itself, on account
of discrimination, and understanding that duality is of the Mind itself,
they see that discrimination ceases to function; and, that seizing and
holding is non-existent; and, free from all thoughts of attachment to
individual objects which are of the Mind itself, and in order to benefit
and give happiness to all sentient beings, [the Bodhisattvas] practise the
Paramita of charity. While dealing with an objective world there is no
rising in them of discrimination; they just practise morality and this is the
Paramita [of morality]. To practise patience with no thought of

discrimination rising in them and yet with full knowledge of grasped and
grasping ¡ªthis is the Paramita of patience. To exert oneself with energy
from the first part of the night to its end and in conformity with the
disciplinary measures and not to give rise to discrimination¡ªthis is the
Paramita of energy. Not to cherish discrimination, not to fall into the
philosopher's notion of Nirvana¡ªthis is the Paramita of Dhyana. As to
the Paramita of Prajna: when the discrimination of the Mind itself
ceases, when things are thoroughly examined by means of intelligence,
there is no falling into dualism, and a revulsion takes place at the basis,
while previous karma is not destroyed; when [transcendental
knowledge] is exercised for the accomplishment of self-realisation, then
there is the Paramita of Prajna. These, Mahamati, are the Paramitas and
their meanings.

So it is said:
9. The created (Samskrita) are empty, impermanent, momentary¡ªso the
ignorant discriminate; the meaning of momentariness is discriminated by
means of the analogies of a river, a lamp, and seeds.
10. All things are non-existent, they are not-momentary, quiescent, not
subject to destruction, and unborn¡ª this, I say, is the meaning of
momentariness.
11. Birth and death succeed without interruption¡ª this I do not point out
for the ignorant. Owing to the uninterrupted succession of existence,
discrimination moves on in the [six] paths.
12. Ignorance is the cause and there is the general rising of -minds,
when form is not yet born, where is the abode of the middle existence?
13. If another mind is set in motion in an uninterrupted succession of
deaths, where does it find its dependence as form is not established in
time?

14. If mind is set in motion, somewhere, somehow, the cause is an
unreal one; it is not complete; how can one know of its momentary
disappearances?
15. The attainment of the Yogins, gold, the Buddha-relics, and the
heavenly palace of Abhasvara are indestructible by any worldly
agencies.
16. Ever abiding are the truths attained by the Buddhas and their perfect
knowledge; the nature of Buddhahood as realised [by them]¡ªhow can
there be momentariness in them?
17. The city of the Gandharvas, Maya-like forms¡ªhow can they be
otherwise than momentary? Realities are characterised with unreality,
and how can they be causal agencies?
(End of Chapter 6)





Chapter 7: On Transformation

At that time again, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva said this to
the Bhagavan: [How was it that] the Arhats were given assurance by the
Bhagavan of their attainment of supreme enlightenment? [How can] all
beings attain Tathagatahood without realising the truths of Parinirvana?
[What does it mean that] from the night when the Tathagata was
awakened to supreme enlightenment until the night when he entered into
Parinirvana, between these times the Tathagata has not uttered, has not
pronounced, a word. [What is the meaning of this] that being always in
Samadhi the Tathagatas neither deliberate nor contemplate? [How do]
Buddhas of transformation, being in the state of transformation, execute
the works of the Tathagatas? How is the succession of momentary
decomposition explained which takes place in the Vijnanas?
[Further, what do these statements mean] that Vajrapa?i is constantly
with [the Tathagata] as his personal guard; that the primary limit is
unknown and yet cessation is knowable; that there are evil ones, their
activities, and left-over karma? Bhagavan, [facts of] karma-hindrance
are said to be shown [by the Tathagata in the incident of] Canca the
daughter of a Brahmin, of Sundar¨© the daughter of a mendicant, an
empty bowl, etc.; how can the Bhagavan with these unexhausted evils
attain all-knowledge?
The Bhagavan replied: Then, Mahamati, listen well and reflect well
within yourself; I will tell you.
Certainly, Bhagavan; said Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva and
gave ear to the Bhagavan.

The Bhagavan said this to him: The realm of Nirvana where no
substratum is left behind is according to the hidden meaning and for the
sake of the practisers who are thereby inspired to exert themselves in
the work of the Bodhisattvas. Mahamati, there are Bodhisattvas
practising the work of the Bodhisattva here and in other Buddha-lands,
who, however, are desirous of attaining the Nirvana of the Sravakayana (Voice-hearer's vehicle). In order to turn their inclination away
from the Sravakayana and to make them exert themselves in the course
of the Mahayana, the Sravakas in transformation are given assurance
[as to their future Buddhahood] by the Body of Transformation; but this
is not done by the Dharmata-Buddha. This giving assurance to the
Sravakas, Mahamati, is declared according to the hidden meaning.
Mahamati, that the abandonment of passion-hindrance by the Sravakas
and Pratyekabuddhas is not different [from that by the Tathagatas] is
due to the sameness of the taste of emancipation, but this does not
apply to the abandonment of knowledge-hindrance. Knowledgehindrance, Mahamati, is purified when the egolessness of things is
distinctly perceived; but passion-hindrance is destroyed when first the
egolessness of persons is perceived and acted upon, for [then] the
Manovijnana ceases to function. Further, dharma-hindrance is given up
because of the disappearance of the habit-energy [accumulated in] the
alayavijnana, it is now thoroughly purified.
There is an eternally-abiding reality [which is to be understood]
according to the hidden meaning, because it is something that has
neither antecedents nor consequents. The Tathagata points out the
Dharma without deliberation, without contemplation, and by means of
such words that are original and independent. Because of his right
thinking and because of his unfailing memory, he neither deliberates nor
contemplates, he is no more at the stage of the fourfold habit-energy, he
is free from the twofold death, he has relinquished the twofold hindrance
of passion and knowledge.
Mahamati, the seven Vijnanas, that is, Manas, Manovijnana,, eyevijnana, etc., are characterised with momentariness because they

originate from habit-energy, they are destitute of the good non-flowing
factors, and are not transmigratory. What transmigrates, Mahamati, is
the Tathagata-garbha which is the cause of Nirvana as well as that of
pleasure and pain. This is not understood by the ignorant whose minds
are torn asunder by the notion of emptiness.
Mahamati, the Tathagatas who are accompanied by Vajrapa?i are the
Tathagatas transformed in transformation and are not the original
Tathagatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones. The original Tathagatas,
Mahamati, are indeed beyond all sense and measurement, beyond the
reach of all ignorant ones, Sravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and
philosophers. [These Tathagatas] are abiding in the joy of existence as it
is, as they have reached the truth of intuitive knowledge by means of
Jnanakshanti. Thus Vajrapa?i is not attached to them. All the Buddhas
of Transformation do not owe their existence to karma; in them there is
no Tathagatahood, but apart from them there is no Tathagatahood
either. Like the potter who is dependent on various combinations, [the
Buddha of Transformation] does his work for sentient beings; he
teaches the doctrine meeting conditions, but not the doctrine that will
establish the truth as it is, which belongs to the noble realm of selfrealisation.
Further, Mahamati, on account of the cessation of the six Vijnanas the
ignorant and simple-minded look for nihilism, and on account of their
not understanding the alayavijnana they have eternalism. The primary
limit of the discrimination of their own minds is unknown, Mahamati.
Emancipation is obtained when this discrimination of Mind itself ceases.
With the abandonment of the fourfold habit-energy the abandonment of
all faults takes place.
So it is said:1
1. The three vehicles are no-vehicle; there is no Nirvana with the
Buddhas; it is pointed out that the assurance of Buddhahood is given to
all that are freed from faults.

2. Ultimate intuitive knowledge, Nirvana that leaves no remnant, ¡ªthis is
told according to the hidden meaning in order to give encouragement to
the timid.
3. Knowledge is produced by the Buddhas, and the path is pointed out
by them: they move in it and not in anything else, therefore there is no
Nirvana with them.
4. Existence, desire, form (rupa), theorising¡ªthis is the fourfold habitenergy; this is where the Mano-vijnana takes its rise and the alaya and
Manas abide.
5. Nihilism and the idea of impermanency rise because of the
Manovijnana, the eye-vijnana, etc.; eternalism rises from [the thought
that] there is no beginning in Nirvana, intelligence, and theorisation.
(End of Chapter 7)





Chapter 8: Stop Meat Eating

At that time Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva asked the Bhagavan in verse and
again made a request, saying: Pray tell me, Bhagavan, Tathagata, Arhat, FullyEnlightened One regarding the merit of not eating meat, and the vice of meat-eating;
thereby I and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas of the present and future may teach the
Dharma to make those beings abandon their greed for meat, who, under the influence of
the habit-energy belonging to the carnivorous existence, strongly crave meat-food. These
meat-eaters thus abandoning their desire for [its] taste will seek the Dharma for their food
and enjoyment, and, regarding all beings with love as if they were an only child, will
cherish great compassion towards them. Cherishing [great compassion], they will
discipline themselves at the stages of Bodhisattvahood and will quickly be awakened in
supreme enlightenment; or staying a while at the stage of Sravakahood and
Pratyekabuddhahood, they will finally reach the highest stage of Tathagatahood.
Bhagavan, even those philosophers who hold erroneous doctrines and are addicted to the
views of the Lokayata such as the dualism of being and non-being, nihilism, and
eternalism, will prohibit meat-eating and will themselves refrain from eating it. How
much more, O World Leader, he who promotes one taste for mercy and is the FullyEnlightened One; why not prohibit in his teachings the eating of flesh not only by himself
but by others? Indeed, let the Bhagavan who at heart is filled with pity for the entire
world, who regards all beings as his only child, and who possesses great compassion in
compliance with his sympathetic feelings, teach us as to the vice of meat-eating and the
merit of not eating meat, so that I and other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas may teach the
Dharma.
Said the Bhagavan: Then, Mahamati, listen well and reflect well within yourself; I will
tell you.
Certainly, Bhagavan; said Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva and gave ear to the
Bhagavan.
The Bhagavan said this to him: For innumerable reasons, Mahamati, the Bodhisattva,
whose nature is compassion, is not to eat any meat; I will explain them: Mahamati, in this
long course of transmigration here, there is not one living being that, having assumed the
form of a living being, has not been your mother, or father, or brother, or sister, or son, or
daughter, or the one or the other, in various degrees of kinship; and when acquiring
another form of life may live as a beast, as a domestic animal, as a bird, or as a wombborn, or as something standing in some relationship to you; [this being so] how can the

Bodhisattva-Mahasattva who desires to approach all living beings as if they were himself
and to practise the Buddha-truths, eat the flesh of any living being that is of the same
nature as himself? Even, Mahamati, the Rakshasa, listening to the Tathagata's discourse
on the highest essence of the Dharma, attained the notion of protecting [Buddhism], and,
feeling pity, refrains from eating flesh; how much more those who love the Dharma!
Thus, Mahamati, wherever there is the evolution of living beings, let people cherish the
thought of kinship with them, and, thinking that all beings are [to be loved as if they
were] an only child, let them refrain from eating meat. So with Bodhisattvas whose
nature is compassion, [the eating of] meat is to be avoided by him. Even in exceptional
cases, it is not [compassionate] of a Bodhisattva of good standing to eat meat. The flesh
of a dog, an ass, a buffalo, a horse, a bull, or man, or any other [being], Mahamati, that is
not generally eaten by people, is sold on the roadside as mutton for the sake of money;
and therefore, Mahamati, the Bodhisattva should not eat meat.
For the sake of love of purity, Mahamati, the Bodhisattva should refrain from eating flesh
which is born of semen, blood, etc. For fear of causing terror to living beings, Mahamati,
let the Bodhisattva who is disciplining himself to attain compassion, refrain from eating
flesh. To illustrate, Mahamati: When a dog sees, even from a distance, a hunter, a pariah,
a fisherman, etc., whose desires are for meat-eating, he is terrified with fear, thinking,
"They are death-dealers, they will even kill me." In the same way, Mahamati, even those
minute animals that are living in the air, on earth, and in water, seeing meat-eaters at a
distance, will perceive in them, by their keen sense of smell, the odour of the Rakshasa
and will run away from such people as quickly as possible; for they are to them the threat
of death. For this reason, Mahamati, let the Bodhisattva, who is disciplining himself, to
abide in great compassion, because of its terrifying living beings, refrain from eating
meat. Mahamati, meat which is liked by unwise people is full of bad smell and its eating
gives one a bad reputation which turns wise people away; let the Bodhisattva refrain from
eating meat. The food of the wise, Mahamati, is what is eaten by the Rishis; it does not
consist of meat and blood. Therefore, Mahamati, let the Bodhisattva refrain from eating
meat.
In order to guard the minds of all people, Mahamati, let the Bodhisattva whose nature is
holy and who is desirous of avoiding censure on the teaching of the Buddha, refrain from
eating meat. For instance, Mahamati, there are some in the world who speak ill of the
teaching of the Buddha; [they would say,] "Why are those Sramana who carry out pure
practices, reject the celestial beings' food, but like the carnivorous animals who fill their
stomachs with fleshes, go wandering about in the world thoroughly terrifying living
beings, disregarding the life of a Sramana and destroying the vow of a Brahmin? There is
no Dharma, no discipline in them." There are many such adverse-minded people who
thus speak ill of the teaching of the Buddha. For this reason, Mahamati, in order to guard
the minds of all people, let the Bodhisattva whose nature is full of pity and who is
desirous of avoiding censure on the teaching of the Buddha, you should not eat meat.
Mahamati, there is generally an offensive odour to a corpse, which goes against nature;
therefore, let the Bodhisattva refrain from eating meat. Mahamati, when flesh is burned,
whether it be that of a dead man or of some other living creature, there is no distinction in

the odour. When flesh of either kind is burned, the odour emitted is equally noxious.
Therefore, Mahamati, let the Bodhisattva, who is ever desirous of purity in his discipline,
wholly refrain from eating meat.
Mahamati, when sons or daughters of good family, wishing to exercise themselves in
various disciplines such as the attainment of a compassionate heart, the holding a magical
formula, or the perfecting of magical knowledge, or starting on a pilgrimage to the
Mahayana, retire into a cemetery, or to a wilderness, or a forest, where demons gather or
frequently approach; or when they attempt to sit on a couch or a seat for the exercise;
they are hindered [because of their meat-eating] from gaining magical powers or from
obtaining emancipation. Mahamati, seeing that thus there are obstacles to the
accomplishing of all the practices, let the Bodhisattva, who is desirous of benefiting
himself as well as others, wholly refrain from eating meat.
As even the sight of objective forms gives rise to the desire for tasting their delicious
flavour, let the Bodhisattva, whose nature is pity and who regards all beings as his only
child, wholly refrain from eating meat. Recognising that his mouth smells most
obnoxiously, even while living this life, let the Bodhisattva whose nature is pity, wholly
refrain from eating meat.
[The meat-eater] sleeps uneasily and when awakened is distressed. He dreams of dreadful
events, which makes his hair rise on end. He is left alone in an empty hut; he leads a
solitary life; and his spirit is seized by demons. Frequently he is struck with terror, he
trembles without knowing why, there is no regularity in his eating, he is never satisfied.
In his eating1 he never knows what is meant by proper taste, digestion, and nourishment.
His visceras are filled with worms and other impure creatures and harbour the cause of
leprosy. He ceases to entertain any thoughts of aversion towards all diseases. When I
teach to regard food as if it were eating the flesh of one's own child, or taking a drug, how
can I permit my disciples, Mahamati, to eat food consisting of flesh and blood, which is
gratifying to the unwise but is abhorred by the wise, which brings many evils and keeps
away many merits; and which was not offered to the Rishis and is altogether unsuitable?
Now, Mahamati, the food I have permitted [my disciples to take] is gratifying to all wise
people but is avoided by the unwise; it is productive of many merits, it keeps away many
evils; and it has been prescribed by the ancient Rishis. It comprises rice, barley, wheat,
kidney beans, beans, lentils, etc., clarified butter, oil, honey, molasses, treacle, sugar
cane, coarse sugar, etc.; food prepared with these is proper food. Mahamati, there may be
some irrational people in the future who will discriminate and establish new rules of
moral discipline, and who, under the influence of the habit-energy belonging to the
carnivorous races, will greedily desire the taste [of meat]: it is not for these people that
the above food is prescribed. Mahamati, this is the food I urge for the BodhisattvaMahasattvas who have made offerings to the previous Buddhas, who have planted roots
of goodness, who are possessed of faith, devoid of discrimination, who are all men and
women belonging to the Sakya family, who are sons and daughters of good family, who
have no attachment to body, life, and property, who do not covet delicacies, are not at all

greedy, who being compassionate desire to embrace all living beings as their own person,
and who regard all beings with affection as if they were an only child.
Long ago in the past, Mahamati, there lived a king whose name was Simhasaudasa. His
excessive fondness for meat, his greed to be served with it, stimulated his taste for it to
the highest degree so that he [even] ate human flesh. In consequence of this he was
alienated from the society of his friends, counsellors, kinsmen, relatives, not to speak of
his townsmen and countrymen. In consequence he had to renounce his throne and
dominion and to suffer great calamities because of his passion for meat.
Mahamati, even Indra who obtained sovereignty over the gods had once to assume the
form of a hawk owing to his habit-energy of eating meat for food in a previous existence;
he then chased ViSvakarma appearing in the guise of a pigeon, who had thus to place
himself on the scale. King Sivi feeling pity for the innocent [pigeon had to sacrifice
himself to the hawk and thus] to suffer great pain. Even a god who became Indra the
Powerful, after going through many a birth, Mahamati, is liable to bring misfortune both
upon himself and others; how much more those who are not Indra!
Mahamati, there was another king1 who was carried away by his horse into a forest.
After wandering about in it, he committed evil deeds with a lioness out of fear for his life,
and children were born to her. Because of their descending from the union with a lioness,
the royal children were called the Spotted-Feet, etc. On account of their evil habit-energy
in the past when their food had been flesh, they ate meat even [after becoming] king, and,
Mahamati, in this life they lived in a village called Kutiraka ("seven huts"), and because
they were excessively attached and devoted to meat-eating they gave birth to Dakas and
Dakinis who were terrible eaters of human flesh. In the life of transmigration, Mahamati,
such ones will fall into the wombs of such excessive flesh-devouring creatures as the
lion, tiger, panther, wolf, hyena, wild-cat, jackal, owl, etc.; they will fall into the wombs
of still more greedily flesh-devouring and still more terrible Rakshasas. Falling into such,
it will be with difficulty that they can ever obtain a human womb; how much more
[difficult] attaining Nirvana!
Such as these, Mahamati, are the evils of meat-eating; how much more numerous [evil]
qualities that are born of the perverted minds of those devoted to [meat-eating]1. And,
Mahamati, the ignorant and simple-minded are not aware of all this and other evils of
meat-eating, and the merits of not eating meat. I tell you, Mahamati, that seeing these
evils and merits the Bodhisattva whose nature is pity should eat no meat.
Mahamati, in most cases, slaughters are done for meat-eaters, If no one eats meat, there
will be no destroyer of life, therefore, eating meat produce the same sin as killing. Those
in the world who addict to the flavor of meat would eat even human flesh, not to mention
the flesh of birds, beasts, and so forth. Mahamati, in most cases nets and other devices are
prepared in various places by people who have lost their sense on account of their
appetite for meat-taste, and thereby many innocent victims are destroyed for the sake of
the price [they bring in]--such as birds, Kaurabhraka, Kaivarta, etc., that are moving
about in the air, on land, and in water. There are even some, Mahamati, who are like

Rakshasas hard-hearted and used to practising cruelties, 2 who, being so devoid of
compassion, would now and then look at living beings as meant for food and destruction- no compassion is awakened in them.
It is not true, Mahamati, that meat is proper food and permissible for the Sravaka when
[the victim] was not killed by himself, when he did not order others to kill it, when it was
not specially meant for him. Again, Mahamati, there may be some unwitted people in the
future time, who, beginning to lead the homeless life according to my teaching, are
acknowledged as sons of the Sakya, and carry the Kashaya robe about them as a badge,
but who are in thought evilly affected by erroneous reasonings. They may talk about
various discriminations which they make in their moral discipline, being addicted to the
view of a personal soul. Being under the influence of the thirst for [meat-] taste, they will
string together in various ways some sophistic arguments to defend meat-eating. They
think they are giving me an unprecedented calumny when they discriminate and talk
about facts that are capable of various interpretations. Imagining that this fact allows this
interpretation, [they conclude that] the Bhagavan permits meat as proper food, and that it
is mentioned among permitted foods and that probably the Tathagata himself partook of
it. But, Mahamati, nowhere in the sutras is meat permitted as something enjoyable, nor it
is referred to as proper among the foods prescribed [for the Buddha's followers].
If however, Mahamati, I had the mind to permit [meat-eating], or if I said it was proper
for the Sravakas [to eat meat], I would not have forbidden, I would not forbid, ail meateating for these Yogins, the sons and daughters of good family, who, wishing to cherish
the idea that all beings are to them like an only child, are possessed of compassion,
practise contemplation, mortification, and are on their way to the Mahayana. And,
Mahamati, the interdiction not to eat any kind of meat is here given to all sons and
daughters of good family, whether they are cemetery-ascetics of forest-ascetics, or
Yogins who are practising the exercises, if they wish the Dharma and are on the way to
the mastery of any vehicle, and being possessed of compassion, conceive the idea of
regarding all beings as an only child, in order to accomplish the end of their discipline.
In the canonical texts here and there the process of discipline is developed in orderly
sequence like a ladder going up step by step, and one joined to another in a regular and
methodical manner; after explaining each point meat obtained in these specific
circumstances is not interdicted.1 Further, a tenfold prohibition is given as regards the
flesh of animals found dead by themselves. But in the present sutra all [meat-eating] in
any form, in any manner, and in any place, is unconditionally and once for all, prohibited
for all. Thus, Mahamati, meat-eating I have not permitted to anyone, I do not permit, I
will not permit. Meat-eating, I tell you, Mahamati, is not proper for homeless monks.
There may be some, Mahamati, who would say that meat was eaten by the Tathagata
thinking this would calumniate him. Such unwitted people as these, Mahamati, will
follow the evil course of their own karma-hindrance, and will fall into such regions where
long nights are passed without profit and without happiness. Mahamati, the noble
Sravakas do not eat the food taken properly by [ordinary] men, how much less the food
of flesh and blood, which is altogether improper. Mahamati, the food for my Sravakas,
Pratyekabuddhas, and Bodhisattvas is the Dharma and not flesh2-food; how much more

the Tathagata! The Tathagata is the Dharmakaya, Mahamati; he abides in the Dharma as
food; his is not a body feeding on flesh; he does not abide in any flesh-food. He has
ejected the habit-energy of thirst and desire which sustain all existence; he keeps away
the habit-energy of all evil passions; he is thoroughly emancipated in mind and
knowledge; he is the All-knower; he is All-seer; he regards all beings impartially as an
only child; he is a great compassionate heart. Mahamati, having the thought of an only
child for all beings, how can I, such as I am, permit the Sravakas to eat the flesh of their
own child? How much less my eating it! That I have permitted the Sravakas as well as
myself to partake of [meat-eating], Mahamati, has no foundation whatever.
So it is said:
1. Liquor, meat, and onions are to be avoided, Mahamati, by the BodhisattvaMahasattvas and those who are Victor-heroes.
2. Meat is not agreeable to the wise: it has a nauseating odour, it causes a bad reputation,
it is food for the carnivorous; I say1 this, Mahamati, it is not to be eaten.
3. To those who eat [meat] there are detrimental effects, to those who do not, merits;
Mahamati, you should know that meat-eaters bring detrimental effects upon themselves.
4. Let the Yogin refrain from eating flesh as it is born of himself, as [the eating] involves
transgression, as [flesh] is produced of semen and blood, and as [the killing of animals]
causes terror to living beings.
5. Let the Yogin always refrain from meat, onions, various kinds of liquor, allium, and
garlic.
6. Do not anoint the body with sesamum oil; do not sleep on a bed, perforated with
spikes; for the living beings who find their shelter in the cavities and in places where
there are no cavities may be terribly frightened.2
7. From eating [meat] arrogance is born, from arrogance erroneous imaginations issue,
and from imagination is born greed; and for this reason refrain from eating [meat].
8. From imagination, greed is born, and by greed the mind it stupefied; there is
attachment to stupefaction, and there is no emancipation from birth [and death].
9. For profit sentient beings are destroyed, for flesh money is paid out, they are both evildoers and [the deed] matures in the hells called Raurava (screaming), etc.
10. One who eats flesh, trespassing against the words of the Muni, is evil-minded; he is
pointed out in the teachings of the Sakya as the destroyer of the welfare of the two
worlds.

11. Those evil-doers go to the most horrifying hell; meat-eaters are matured in the terrific
hells such as Raurava, etc.
12. There is no meat to be regarded as pure in three ways: not premeditated, not asked
for, and not impelled; therefore, refrain from eating meat.
13. Let not the Yogin eat meat, it is forbidden by myself as well as by the Buddhas; those
sentient beings who feed on one another will be reborn among the carnivorous animals.
14. The meat-eater is ill-smelling, contemptuous, and born deprived of intelligence; he
will be born again and again among the families of the Candala(slaughterman), the
Pukkasa, and the Domba.
15. Prom the womb of Dakin¨© he will be born in the meat-eaters' family, and then into
the womb of a Rakshas¨© and a cat; he belongs to the lowest class of men.
16. Meat-eating is rejected by me in such sutras as the Hastikakshya, the Mahamegha, the
Nirvana, the Anglimalika, and the Lankavatara.
17. [Meat-eating] is condemned by the Buddhas, Bodhisattvas, and Sravakas; if one
devours [meat] out of shamelessness he will always be devoid of sense.
18. One who avoids meat, etc., will be born, because of this fact, in the family of the
Brahmins or of the Yogins, endowed with knowledge and wealth.
19. Let one avoid all meat-eating [whatever they may say about] witnessing, hearing, and
suspecting; these theorisers born in a carnivorous family understand this not.
20. As greed is the hindrance to emancipation, so are meat-eating, liquor, etc.,
hindrances.
21. There may be in time to come people who make foolish remarks about meat-eating,
saying, "Meat is proper to eat, unobjectionable, and permitted by the Buddha."
22. Meat-eating is a medicine; again, it is like a child's flesh; follow the proper measure
and be averse [to meat, and thus] let the Yogin go about begging.
23. [Meat-eating] is forbidden by me everywhere and all the time for those who are
abiding in compassion; [he who eats meat] will be born in the same place as the lion,
tiger, wolf, etc.
24. Therefore, do not eat meat which will cause terror among people, because it hinders
the truth of emancipation; not to eat meat-- this is the mark of the wise.
(End of Chapter 8)





Chapter 9: Dharani

At that time the Bhagavan addressed Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva: Mahamati,
you should hold forth these magical phrases of the Lankavatara, which were recited, are
recited, and will be recited by the Buddhas of the past, present, and future. I will recite
them here for the benefit of the proclaimers of the Dharma, who will retain them in
memory. They are:
Tutte, tutte--vutte, vutte--patte, patte--katte, katte--amale, amale--vimale, vimale--nime,
nime--hime, hime--vame, vame--kale, kale, kale, kale--atte, matte--vatte, tutte--jnette,
sputte--katte, katte--latte, patte--dime dime--cale, cale--pace, pace--badhe, bandhe--ance,
mance--dutare, dutare--patare, patare--arkke, arkke--sarkke, sarkke--cakre, cakre--dime,
dime-hime, hime --tu tu tu tu --du du du du --ru ru ru ru --phu phu phu phu --svaha.
These, Mahamati, are the magical phrases of the Lankavatara Mahayana Sutra: If sons
and daughters of good family should hold forth, retain, proclaim, realise these magical
phrases, no one should ever be able to effect his descent upon them. Whether it be a god,
or a goddess, or a Naga, or a Nagi, or a Yaksha, or a Yakshi, or an Asura, or an Asuri, or
a Garuda, or a Garudi, or a Kinnara, or a Kannari, or a Mahoraga, or a Mahoragi, or a
Gandharva, or a Gandharvi, or a Bhuta, or a Bhuti, or a Kumbhanda, or a Kumbhandi, or
a Pisara, or a Pisaci, or an Austaraka, or an Austaraki, or a Apasmara, or an Apasmari, or
a Rakshasa, or a Rakshasi, or a Daka, or a Dakini, or an Aujohara, or an Aujohari, or a
Kataputana, or a Kataputani, or an Amanushya, or an Amanushyi, --no one of these will
be able to effect his or her descent [upon the holder of these magical phrases]. If any
misfortune should befall, let him recite the magical phrases for one hundred and eight
times, and [the evil ones] will, wailing and crying, turn away and go in another direction.
I will tell you, Mahamati, other magical phrases. They are:
Padme, padmadeve--hine, hini, hine--cu, cule, eulu, cule--phale, phula, phule--yule,
ghule, yula, yule--ghule, ghula, ghule--pale, pala, pale--munce, munce, munce--cchinde,
bhinde, bhanje, marde, pramarde, dinakare--svaha.
If, Mahamati, any son or daughter of good family should hold forth, retain, proclaim, and
realise these magical phrases, on him or her no [evil beings] should be able to make their
descent. Whether it be a god, or a goddess, or a Naga, or a Nagi, or a Yaksha, or a
Yakshi, or an Asura, or an Asuri, a Garuda, or a Garudi, or a Kinnara, or a Kinnari, or a
Mahoraga, or a Mahoragi, or a Gandharva, or a Gandharvi, or a Bhuta, or a Bhuti, or a
Kumbhanda, or a Kumbhandi, or a Pisaca, or a Pisaci, or an Austaraka, or an Austaraki,

or an Apasmara, or an Apasmari, or a Rakshasa, or a Rakshasi, or a Daka, or a Dakini, or
an Aujohara, or an Aujohari, or a Kataputana, or a Kataputani, or an Amanushya, or an
Amanushyi--no one of these will be able to effect his or her descent upon [the holder of
these magical phrases]. By him who will recite these magic phrases, the [whole]
Lankavatara Sutra will be recited. These magic phrases are given by the Blessed One to
guard against the interference of the Rakshasas.
(End of Chapter 9)

