~ Chapter 1 ~
First Adhyaya
1:1. Kitra Gangyayani, forsooth, wishing to perform a
sacrifice, chose Aruni (Uddalaka, to be his chief
priest). But Aruni sent his son, Svetaketu, and said:
`Perform the sacrifice for him.' When Svetaketu had
arrived, Kitra asked him: `Son of Gautama, is there a
hidden place in the world where you are able to
place me, or is it the other way, and are you going to
place me in the world to which it (that other way)
leads?'
He answered and said: `I do not know this. But, let me
ask the master.' Having approached his father, he
asked `Thus has Kitra asked me; how shall I answer?'
Aruni said: `I also do not know this. Only after having
learnt the proper portion of the Veda in Kitra's
own dwelling, shall we obtain what others give us
(knowledge). Come, we will both go.'
Having said this he took fuel in his hand (like a pupil), and
approached Kitra Gangyayani, saying: `May I
come near to you?' He replied: `You are worthy of
Brahman, O Gautama, because you were not led away
by pride. Come hither, I shall make you know clearly.'
1:2. And Kitra said: All who depart from this world (or this
body go to the moon. In the former, (the
bright) half, the moon delights in their spirits; in the other,
(the dark) half, the moon sends them on to be
born again. Verily, the moon is the door of the Svarga
world (the heavenly world). Now, if a man objects
to the moon (if one is not satisfied with life there) the
moon sets him free. But if a man does not object,
then the moon sends him down as rain upon this earth.
And according to his deeds and according to his
knowledge he is born again here as a worm, or as an
insect, or as a fish, or as a bird, or as a lion, or as a
boar, or as a serpent, or as a tiger, or as a man, or as
something else in different places. When he has thus 
returned to the earth, some one (a sage) asks: `Who art
thou?' And he should answer: `From the wise
moon, who orders the seasons, when it is born consisting
of fifteen parts, from the moon who is the home
of our ancestors, the seed was brought. This seed, even
me, they (the gods mentioned in the
Pankagnividya) gathered up in an active man, and
through an active man they brought me to a mother.
Then I, growing up to be born, a being living by months,
whether twelve or thirteen, was together with my
father, who also lived by (years of) twelve or thirteen
months, that I might either know it (the true
Brahman) or not know it. Therefore, O ye seasons, grant
that I may attain immortality (knowledge of
Brahman). By this my true saying, by this my toil
(beginning with the dwelling in the moon and ending
with my birth on earth) I am (like) a season, and the child
of the seasons.' `Who art thou?' the sage asks
again. `I am thou,' he replies. Then he sets him free (to
proceed onward).
1:3. He (at the time of death), having reached the path of
the gods, comes to the world of Agni (fire), to
the world of Vayu (air), to the world of Varuna, to the
world of Indra, to the world of Pragapati (Virag), to
the world of Brahman (Hiranyagarbha). In that world
there is the lake Ara, the moments called Yeshtiha,
the river Vigara (age-less), the tree Ilya, the city Salagya,
the palace Aparagita (unconquerable), the doorkeepers Indra and Pragapati, the hall of Brahman, called
Vibhu (built by vibhu, egoism), the throne
Vikakshana (buddhi, perception), the couch Amitaugas
(endless splendour), and the beloved Manasi
(mind) and her image Kakshushi (eye), who, as if taking
flowers, are weaving the worlds, and the
Apsaras, the Ambas (sruti, sacred scriptures), and
Ambayavis (buddhi, understanding), and the rivers
Ambayas (leading to the knowledge of Brahman). To this
world he who knows this (who knows the
Paryanka-vidya) approaches. Brahman says to him: `Run
towards him (servants) with such worship as is
due to myself. He has reached the river Vigara (ageless), he will never age.'
1:4. Then five hundred Apsaras go towards him, one
hundred with garlands in their hands, one hundred 
with ointments in their hands, one hundred with perfumes
in their hands, one hundred with garments in
their hands, one hundred with fruit in their hands. They
adorn him with an adornment worthy of
Brahman, and when thus adorned with the adornment of
Brahman, the knower of Brahman moves
towards Brahman (neut.) He comes to the lake Ara, and
he crosses it by the mind, while those who come
to it without knowing the truth, are drowned. He comes to
the moments called Yeshtiha, they flee from
him. He comes to the river Vigara, and crosses it by the
mind alone, and there shakes off his good and
evil deeds. His beloved relatives obtain the good, his
unbeloved relatives the evil he has done. And as a
man, driving in a chariot, might look at the two wheels
(without being touched by them), thus he will look
at day and night, thus at good and evil deeds, and at all
pairs (at all correlative things, such as light and
darkness, heat and cold, &c.) Being freed from good and
freed from evil he, the knower of Brahman
(neut.), moves towards Brahman.
1:5. He approaches the tree Ilya, and the odour of
Brahman reaches him. He approaches the city Salagya,
and the flavour of Brahman reaches him. He approaches
the palace Aparagita, and the splendour of
Brahman reaches him. He approaches the door-keepers
Indra and Pragapati, and they run away from
him. He approaches the hall Vibhu, and the glory of
Brahman reaches him (he thinks, I am Brahman).
He approaches the throne Vikakshana. The Saman
verses, Brihad and Rathantara, are the eastern feet of
that throne; the Saman verses, Syaita and Naudhasa, its
western feet; the Saman verses, Vairupa and
Vairaga, its sides lengthways (south and north); the
Saman verses, Sakvara and Raivata, its sides
crossways (east and west). That throne is Pragna,
knowledge, for by knowledge (self-knowledge) he sees
clearly. He approaches the couch Amitaugas. That is
Prana (speech). The past and the future are its
eastern feet; prosperity and earth its western feet; the
Saman verses, Brihad and Rathantara, are the two
sides lengthways of the couch (south and north); the
Saman verses, Bhadra and Yagnayagniya, are its
cross-sides at the head and feet (east and west); the Rik
and Saman are the long sheets (east and west); the 
Yagus the cross-sheets (south and north); the moonbeam the cushion; the Udgitha the (white) coverlet;
prosperity the pillow. On this couch sits Brahman, and he
who knows this (who knows himself one with
Brahman sitting on the couch) mounts it first with one foot
only. Then Brahman says to him: `Who art
thou?' and he shall answer:
1:6. `I am (like) a season, and the child of the seasons,
sprung from the womb of endless space, from the
light (from the luminous Brahman). The light, the origin of
the year, which is the past, which is the
present, which is all living things, and all elements, is the
Self. Thou art the Self. What thou art, that am
I.'
Brahman says to him: `Who am I?' He shall answer: `That
which is, the true' (Sat-tyam).
Brahman asks: `What is the true?' He says to him: `What
is different from the gods and from the senses
(prana) that is Sat, but the gods and the senses are
Tyam. Therefore by that name Sattya (true) is called
all this whatever there is. All this thou art.'
1:7. This is also declared by a verse: `This great Rishi,
whose belly is the Yagus, the head the Saman, the
form the Rik, is to be known as being imperishable, as
being Brahman.'
Brahman says to him: `How dost thou obtain my male
names?' He should answer: `By breath (pranah).'
Brahman asks: `How my female names?' He should
answer: `By speech (vak).'
Brahman asks: `How my neuter names?' He should
answer: `By mind (manas).'
`How smells?' `By the nose.' `How forms?' `By the eye.'
`How sounds?' `By the ear.' `How flavours of
food?' `By the tongue.' `How actions?' `By the hands.'
`How pleasures and pain?' `By the body.' `How
joy, delight, and offspring?' `By the organ.' `How
journeyings?' `By the feet.' `How thoughts, and what is 
to be known and desired?' `By knowledge (pragna)
alone.'
Brahman says to him: `Water indeed is this my world, the
whole Brahman world, and it is thine.'
Whatever victory, whatever might belongs to Brahman,
that victory and that might he obtains who knows
this, yea, who knows this.

~ Chapter 2 ~
Second Adhyaya
2:1. Prana (breath) is Brahman, thus says Kaushitaki. Of
this prana, which is Brahman, the mind
(manas) is the messenger, speech the housekeeper, the
eye the guard, the ear the informant. He who
knows mind as the messenger of prana, which is
Brahman, becomes possessed of the messenger. He
who
knows speech as the housekeeper, becomes possessed
of the housekeeper. He who knows the eye as the
guard, becomes possessed of the guard. He who knows
the ear as the informant, becomes possessed of the
informant.
Now to that prana, which is Brahman, all these deities
(mind, speech, eye, ear) bring an offering, though
he asks not for it, and thus to him who knows this all
creatures bring an offering, though he asks not for
it. For him who knows this, there is this Upanishad
(secret vow), `Beg not!' As a man who has begged
through a village and got nothing sits down and says, `I
shall never eat anything given by those people,'
and as then those who formerly refused him press him (to
accept their alms), thus is the rule for him who
begs not, but the charitable will press him and say, `Let
us give to thee.'
2:2. Prana (breath) is Brahman, thus says Paingya. And
in that prana, which is Brahman, the eye stands
firm behind speech, the ear stands firm behind the eye,
the mind stands firm behind the ear, and the spirit 
stands firm behind the mind. To that prana, which is
Brahman, all these deities bring an offering, though
he asks not for it, and thus to him who knows this, all
creatures bring an offering, though he asks not for
it. For him who knows this, there is this Upanishad
(secret vow), `Beg not!' As a man who has begged
through a village and got nothing sits down and says, `I
shall never eat anything given by those people,'
and as then those who formerly refused him press him (to
accept their alms), thus is the rule for him who
begs not, but the charitable will press him and say, `Let
us give to thee.'
2:3. Now follows the attainment of the highest treasure
(scil. prana, spirit). If a man meditates on that
highest treasure, let him on a full moon or a new moon, or
in the bright fortnight, under an auspicious
Nakshatra, at one of these proper times, bending his right
knee, offer oblations of ghee with a ladle
(sruva), after having placed the fire, swept the ground,
strewn the sacred grass, and sprinkled water. Let
him say: `The deity called Speech is the attainer, may it
attain this for me from him (who possesses and
can bestow what I wish for). Svaha to it!'
`The deity called prana (breath) is the attainer, may it
attain this for me from him. Svaha to it!'
`The deity called the eye is the attainer, may it attain this
for me from him. Svaha to it!'
`The deity called the ear is the attainer, may it attain this
for me from him. Svaha to it!'
`The deity called mind (manas) is the attainer of it, may it
attain this for me from him. Svaha to it.'
`The deity called pragna (knowledge) is the attainer of it,
may it attain this for me from him. Svaha to it!'
Then having inhaled the smell of the smoke, and having
rubbed his limbs with the ointment of ghee,
walking on in silence, let him declare his wish, or let him
send a messenger. He will surely obtain his
wish. 
2:4. Now follows the Daiva Smara, the desire to be
accomplished by the gods. If a man desires to become
dear to any man or woman, or to any men or women,
then at one of the (fore-mentioned) proper times he
offers, in exactly the same manner (as before), oblations
of ghee, saying: `I offer thy speech in myself, I
(this one here), Svaha.' `I offer thy ear in myself, I (this
one here), Svaha.' `I offer thy mind in myself, I
(this one here), Svaha.' `I offer thy pragna (knowledge) in
myself, I (this one here), Svaha.' Then having
inhaled the smell of the smoke, and having rubbed his
limbs with the ointment of ghee, walking on in
silence, let him try to come in contact or let him stand
speaking in the wind, (so that the wind may carry
his words to the person by whom he desires to be loved).
Surely he becomes dear, and they think of him.
2:5. Now follows the restraint (samyamana) instituted by
Pratardana (the son of Divodasa): they call it
the inner Agni-hotra. So long as a man speaks, he
cannot breathe, he offers all the while his prana
(breath) in his speech. And so long as a man breathes,
he cannot speak, he offers all the while his speech
in his breath. These two endless and immortal oblations
he offers always, whether waking or sleeping.
Whatever other oblations there are (those, e.g. of the
ordinary Agnihotra, consisting of milk and other
things), they have an end, for they consist of works
(which, like all works, have an end). The ancients,
knowing this (the best Agnihotra), did not offer the
(ordinary) Agnihotra.
2:6. Uktha is Brahman, thus said Sushkabhringara. Let
him meditate on it (the uktha) as the same with
the Rik, and all beings will praise him as the best. Let
him meditate on it as the same with the Yagus, and
all beings will join before him as the best. Let him
meditate on it as the same with the Saman, and all
beings will bow before him as the best. Let him meditate
on it as the same with might, let him meditate on
it as the same with glory, let him meditate on it as the
same with splendour. For as the bow is among
weapons the mightiest, the most glorious, the most
splendid, thus is he who knows this among all beings
the mightiest, the most glorious, the most splendid. The
Adhvaryu conceives the fire of the altar, which is 
used for the sacrifice, to be himself. In it he (the
Adhvaryu) weaves the Yagus portion of the sacrifice.
And in the Yagus portion the Hotri weaves the Rik portion
of the sacrifice. And in the Rik portion the
Udgatri weaves the Saman portion of the sacrifice. He
(the Adhvaryu or prana) is the self of the threefold
knowledge; he indeed is the self of it (of prana). He who
knows this is the self of it (becomes prana).
2:7. Next follow the three kinds of meditation of the allconquering (sarvagit) Kaushitaki. The allconquering Kaushitaki adores the sun when rising, having
put on the sacrificial cord, having brought
water, and having thrice sprinkled the water-cup, saying:
`Thou art the deliverer, deliver me from sin.' In
the same manner he adores the sun when in the zenith,
saying: `Thou art the highest deliverer, deliver me
highly from sin.' In the same manner he adores the sun
when setting, saying: `Thou art the full deliverer,
deliver me fully from sin.' Thus he fully removes whatever
sin he committed by day and by night. And in
the same manner he who knows this, likewise adores the
sun, and fully removes whatever sin he
committed by day and by night.
2:8. Then (secondly) let him worship every month (in the
year) at the time of the new moon, the moon as
it is seen in the west in the same manner (as before
described with regard to the sun), or let him send forth
his speech toward the moon with two green blades of
grass, saying: `O thou who art mistress of immortal
joy, through that gentle heart of mine which abides in the
moon, may I never weep for misfortune
concerning my children.'
The children of him (who thus adores the moon) do not
indeed die before him. Thus it is with a man to
whom a son is already born.
Now for one to whom no son is born as yet. He mutters
the three Rik verses. `Increase, O Soma! may
vigour come to thee' (Rv. 1, 91, 16; 9, 31, 4). `May milk,
may food go to thee' (Rv. 1, 91, 18); `That ray
which the Adityas gladden.'
Having muttered these three Rik verses, he says: `Do not
increase by our breath (prana), by our offspring,
by our cattle; he who hates us and whom we hate,
increase by his breath, by his offspring, by his cattle.
Thus I turn the turn of the god, I return the turn of Aditya.'
After these words, having raised the right arm
(toward Soma), he lets it go again.
2:9. Then (thirdly) let him worship on the day of the full
moon the moon as it is seen in the east in the
same manner, saying: `Thou art Soma, the king, the wise,
the five-mouthed, the lord of creatures. The
Brahmana is one of thy mouths; with that mouth thou
eatest the kings (Kshatriyas); make me an eater of
food by that mouth! The king is one of thy mouths; with
that mouth thou eatest the people (Vaisyas);
make me an eater of food by that mouth! The hawk is
one of thy mouths; with that mouth thou eatest the
birds; make me an eater of food by that mouth! Fire is
one of thy mouths; with that mouth thou eatest this
world; make me an eater of food by that mouth! In thee
there is the fifth mouth; with that mouth thou
eatest all beings; make me an eater of food by that
mouth! Do not decrease by our life, by our offspring,
by our cattle; he who hates us and whom we hate,
decrease by his life, by his offspring, by his cattle. Thus
I turn the turn of the god, I return the turn of Aditya.' After
these words, having raised the right arm, he
lets it go again.
2:10. Next (having addressed these prayers to Soma)
when being with his wife, let him stroke her heart,
saying: `O fair one, who hast obtained immortal joy by
that which has entered thy heart through
Pragapati, mayest thou never fall into sorrow about thy
children.' Her children then do not die before her.
2:11. Next, if a man has been absent and returns home,
let him smell (kiss) his son's head, saying: `Thou
springest from every limb, thou art born from the heart,
thou, my son, art my self indeed, live thou a
hundred harvests.' He gives him his name, saying: `Be
thou a stone, be thou an axe, be thou solid gold;
thou, my son, art light indeed, live thou a hundred
harvests.' He pronounces his name. Then he embraces 
him, saying: `As Pragapati (the lord of creatures)
embraced his creatures for their welfare, thus I embrace
thee,' (pronouncing his name.) Then he mutters into his
right ear, saying: `O thou, quick Maghavan, give
to him' (Rv. 3, 36, 10). `O Indra, bestow the best wishes'
(Rv. 2, 21, 6), thus he whispers into his left ear.
Let him then thrice smell (kiss) his head, saying: `Do not
cut off (the line of our race), do not suffer. Live
a hundred harvests of life; I kiss thy head, O son, with thy
name.' He then thrice makes a lowing sound
over his head, saying: `I low over thee with the lowing
sound of cows.'
2:12. Next follows the Daiva Parimara, the dying around
of the gods (the absorption of the two classes of
gods, mentioned before, into prana or Brahman). This
Brahman shines forth indeed when the fire burns,
and it dies when it burns not. Its splendour goes to the
sun alone, the life (prana, the moving principle) to
the air.
This Brahman shines forth indeed when the sun is seen,
and it dies when it is not seen. Its splendour goes
to the moon alone, the life (prana) to the air.
This Brahman shines forth indeed when the moon is
seen, and it dies when it is not seen. Its splendour
goes to the lightning alone, its life (prana) to the air.
This Brahman shines forth indeed when the lightning
flashes, and it dies when it flashes not. Its
splendour goes to the air, and the life (prana) to the air.
Thus all these deities (i.e. fire, sun, moon, lightning),
having entered the air, though dead, do not vanish;
and out of the very air they rise again. So much with
reference to the deities (mythological). Now then
with reference to the body (physiological).
2:13. This Brahman shines forth indeed when one
speaks with speech, and it dies when one does not
speak. His splendour goes to the eye alone, the life
(prana) to breath (prana).
This Brahman shines forth indeed when one sees with
the eye, and it dies when one does not see. Its 
splendour goes to the ear alone, the life (prana) to breath
(prana).
This Brahman shines forth indeed when one hears with
the ear, and it dies when one does not hear. Its
splendour goes to the mind alone, the life (prana) to
breath (prana).
This Brahman shines forth indeed when one thinks with
the mind, and it dies when one does not think.
Its splendour goes to the breath (prana) alone, and the
life (prana) to breath (prana).
Thus all these deities (the senses, &c.), having entered
breath or life (prana) alone, though dead, do not
vanish; and out of very breath (prana) they rise again.
And if two mountains, the southern and northern,
were to move forward trying to crush him who knows this,
they would not crush him. But those who hate
him and those whom he hates, they die around him.
2:14. Next follows the Nihsreyasadana (the accepting of
the pre-eminence of prana (breath or life) by the
other gods). The deities (speech, eye, ear, mind),
contending with each for who was the best, went out of
this body, and the body lay without breathing, withered,
like a log of wood. Then speech went into it, but
speaking by speech, it lay still. Then the eye went into it,
but speaking by speech, and seeing by the eye, it
lay still. Then the ear went into it, but speaking by
speech, seeing by the eye, hearing by the ear, it lay
still. Then mind went into it, but speaking by speech,
seeing by the eye, hearing by the ear, thinking by
the mind, it lay still. Then breath (prana, life) went into it,
and thence it rose at once. All these deities,
having recognised the pre-eminence in prana, and having
comprehended prana alone as the conscious self
(pragnatman), went out of this body with all these (five
different kinds of prana), and resting in the air
(knowing that prana had entered the air), and merged in
the ether (akasa), they went to heaven. And in
the same manner he who knows this, having recognised
the pre-eminence in prana, and having
comprehended prana alone as the conscious self
(pragnatman), goes out of this body with all these (does 
no longer believe in this body), and resting in the air, and
merged in the ether, he goes to heaven, he goes
to where those gods (speech, &c.) are. And having
reached this he, who knows this, becomes immortal
with that immortality which those gods enjoy.
2:15. Next follows the father's tradition to the son, and
thus they explain it. The father, when going to
depart, calls his son, after having strewn the house with
fresh grass, and having laid the sacrificial fire,
and having placed near it a pot of water with a jug (full of
rice), himself covered with a new cloth, and
dressed in white. He places himself above his son,
touching his organs with his own organs, or he may
deliver the tradition to him while he sits before him. Then
he delivers it to him.
The father says: `Let me place my speech in thee.'
The son says: `I take thy speech in me.'
The father says: `Let me place my scent (prana) in thee.'
The son says: `I take thy scent in me.'
The father says: `Let me place my eye in thee.'
The son says: `I take thy eye in me.'
The father says: `Let me place my ear in thee.'
The son says: `I take thy ear in me.'
The father says: `Let me place my tastes of food in
thee.'
The son says: `I take thy tastes of food in me.'
The father says: `Let me place my actions in thee.'
The son says: `I take thy actions in me.'
The father says: `Let me place my pleasure and pain in
thee.'
The son says: `I take thy pleasure and pain in me.' 
The father says: `Let me place happiness, joy, and
offspring in thee.'
The son says: `I take thy happiness, joy, and offspring in
me.'
The father says: `Let me place my walking in thee.'
The son says: `I take thy walking in me.'
The father says: `Let me place my mind in thee.'
The son says: `I take thy mind in me.'
The father says: `Let me place my knowledge (pragna)
in thee.'
The son says: `I take thy knowledge in me.'
But if the father is very ill, he may say shortly: `Let me
place my spirits (pranas) in thee,' and the son: `I
take thy spirits in me.'
Then the son walks round his father keeping his right side
towards him, and goes away. The father calls
after him: `May fame, glory of countenance, and honour
always follow thee.' Then the other looks back
over his left shoulder, covering himself with his hand or
the hem of his garment, saying: `Obtain the
heavenly worlds (svarga) and all desires.'
If the father recovers, let him be under the authority of his
son, or let him wander about (as an ascetic).
But if he departs, then let them despatch him, as he ought
to be despatched, yea, as he ought to be
despatched.

~ Chapter 3 ~
Third Adhyaya
3:1. Pratardana, forsooth, the son of Divodasa (king of
Kasi), came by means of fighting and strength to 
the beloved abode of Indra. Indra said to him:
`Pratardana, let me give you a boon to choose.' And
Pratardana answered: `Do you yourself choose that boon
for me which you deem most beneficial for a
man.' Indra said to him: `No one who chooses, chooses
for another; choose thyself.' Then Pratardana
replied: `Then that boon to choose is no boon for me.'
Then, however, Indra did not swerve from the truth, for
Indra is truth. Indra said to him: `Know me only;
that is what I deem most beneficial for man, that he
should know me. I slew the three-headed son of
Tvashtri; I delivered the Arunmukhas, the devotees, to the
wolves (salavrika); breaking many treaties, I
killed the people of Prahlada in heaven, the people of
Puloma in the sky, the people of Kalakanga on
earth. And not one hair of me was harmed there. And he
who knows me thus, by no deed of his is his life
harmed, not by the murder of his mother, not by the
murder of his father, not by theft, not by the killing of
a Brahman. If he is going to commit a sin, the bloom
does not depart from his face.'
3:2. Indra said: `I am prana, meditate on me as the
conscious self (pragnatman), as life, as immortality.
Life is prana, prana is life. Immortality is prana, prana is
immortality. As long as prana dwells in this
body, so long surely there is life. By prana he obtains
immortality in the other world, by knowledge true
conception. He who meditates on me as life and
immortality, gains his full life in this world, and obtains
in the Svarga world immortality and indestructibility.'
(Pratardana said): `Some maintain here, that the pranas
become one, for (otherwise) no one could at the
same time make known a name by speech, see a form
with the eye, hear a sound with the ear, think a
thought with the mind. After having become one, the
pranas perceive all these together, one by one.
While speech speaks, all pranas speak after it. While the
eye sees, all pranas see after it. While the ear
hears, all pranas hear after it. While the mind thinks, all
pranas think after it. While the prana breathes,
all pranas breathe after it.'
`Thus it is indeed,' said Indra, `but nevertheless there is a
pre-eminence among the pranas.
3:3. Man lives deprived of speech, for we see dumb
people. Man lives deprived of sight, for we see blind
people. Man lives deprived of hearing, for we see deaf
people. Man lives deprived of mind, for we see
infants. Man lives deprived of his arms, deprived of his
legs, for we see it thus. But prana alone is the
conscious self (pragnatman), and having laid hold of this
body, it makes it rise up. Therefore it is said,
Let man worship it alone as uktha. What is prana, that is
pragna (self-consciousness); what is pragna
(self-consciousness), that is prana, for together they
(pragna and prana) live in this body, and together
they go out of it. Of that, this is the evidence, this is the
understanding. When a man, being thus asleep,
sees no dream whatever, he becomes one with that
prana alone. Then speech goes to him (when he is
absorbed in prana) with all names, the eye with all forms,
the ear with all sounds, the mind with all
thoughts. And when he awakes, then, as from a burning
fire sparks proceed in all directions, thus from
that self the pranas (speech, &c.) proceed, each towards
its place; from the pranas the gods (Agni, &c.),
from the gods the worlds.
Of this, this is the proof, this is the understanding. When
a man is thus sick, going to die, falling into
weakness and faintness, they say: `His thought has
departed, he hears not, he sees not, he speaks not, he
thinks not.' Then he becomes one with that prana alone.
Then speech goes to him (who is absorbed in
prana) with all names, the eye with all forms, the ear with
all sounds, the mind with all thoughts. And
when he departs from this body, he departs together with
all these.
3:4. Speech gives up to him (who is absorbed in prana)
all names, so that by speech he obtains all names.
The nose gives up to him all odours, so that by scent he
obtains all odours. The eye gives up to him all
forms, so that by the eye he obtains all forms. The ear
gives up to him all sounds, so that by the ear he
obtains all sounds. The mind gives up to him all
thoughts, so that by the mind he obtains all thoughts. 
This is the complete absorption in prana. And what is
prana is pragna (self-consciousness), what is
pragna (self-consciousness) is prana. For together do
these two live in the body, and together do they
depart.
Now we shall explain how all things become one in that
pragna, (self-consciousness).
3:5. Speech is one portion taken out of pragna (selfconscious knowledge), the word is its object, placed
outside.
The nose is one portion taken out of it, the odour is its
object, placed outside.
The eye is one portion taken out of it, the form is its
object, placed outside.
The ear is one portion taken out of it, the sound is its
object, placed outside.
The tongue is one portion taken out of it, the taste of food
is its object, placed outside.
The two hands are one portion taken out of it, their
action is their object, placed outside.
The body is one portion taken out of it, its pleasure and
pain are its object, placed outside.
The organ is one portion taken out of it, happiness, joy,
and offspring are its object, placed outside.
The two feet are one portion taken out of it, movements
are their object, placed outside.
Mind is one portion taken out of it, thoughts and desires
are its object, placed outside.
3:6. Having by pragna (self-conscious knowledge) taken
possession of speech, he obtains by speech all
words.
Having by pragna taken possession of the nose, he
obtains all odours. 
Having by pragna taken possession of the eye, he
obtains all forms.
Having by pragna taken possession of the ear, he
obtains all sounds.
Having by pragna taken possession of the tongue, he
obtains all tastes of food.
Having by pragna taken possession of the two hands,
he obtains all actions.
Having by pragna taken possession of the body, he
obtains pleasure and pain.
Having by pragna taken possession of the organ, he
obtains happiness, joy, and offspring.
Having by pragna taken possession of the two feet, he
obtains all movements.
Having by pragna taken possession of mind, he obtains
all thoughts.
3:7. For without pragna (self-consciousness) speech
does not make known (to the self) any word. `My
mind was absent,' he says, `I did not perceive that word.'
Without pragna the nose does not make known any
odour. `My mind was absent,' he says, `I did not
perceive that odour.'
Without pragna, the eye does not make known any form.
`My mind was absent,' he says, `I did not
perceive that form.'
Without pragna the ear does not make known any
sound. `My mind was absent,' he says, `I did not
perceive that sound.'
Without pragna the tongue does not make known any
taste. `My mind was absent,' he says, `I did not
perceive that taste.'
Without pragna the two hands do not make known any
act. `Our mind was absent,' they say, `we did not
perceive any act.'
Without pragna, the body does not make known
pleasure or pain. `My mind was absent,' he says, `I did
not perceive that pleasure or pain.'
Without pragna the organ does not make known
happiness, joy, or offspring. `My mind was absent,' he
says, `I did not perceive that happiness, joy, or offspring.'
Without pragna the two feet do not make known any
movement. `Our mind was absent,' they say, `we
did not perceive that movement.'
Without pragna no thought succeeds, nothing can be
known that is to be known.
3:8. Let no man try to find out what speech is, let him
know the speaker.
Let no man try to find out what odour is, let him know
him who smells.
Let no man try to find out what form is, let him know the
seer.
Let no man try to find out what sound is, let him know
the hearer.
Let no man try to find out the tastes of food, let him
know the knower of tastes.
Let no man try to find out what action is, let him know
the agent.
Let no man try to find out what pleasure and pain are, let
him know the knower of pleasure and pain.
Let no man try to find out what happiness, joy, and
offspring are, let him know the knower of happiness,
joy, and offspring.
Let no man try to find out what movement is, let him
know the mover. 
Let no man try to find out what mind is, let him know the
thinker.
These ten objects (what is spoken, smelled, seen, &c.)
have reference to pragna (self-consciousness), the
ten subjects (speech, the senses, mind) have reference
to objects. If there were no objects, there would be
no subjects; and if there were no subjects, there would be
no objects. For on either side alone nothing
could be achieved. But that (the self of pragna,
consciousness, and prana, life) is not many, (but one.)
For
as in a car the circumference of a wheel is placed on the
spokes, and the spokes on the nave, thus are these
objects (circumference) placed on the subjects (spokes),
and the subjects on the prana. And that prana
(breath, the living and breathing power) indeed is the self
of pragna (the self-conscious self), blessed,
imperishable, immortal. He does not increase by a good
action, nor decrease by a bad action. For he (the
self of prana and pragna) makes him, whom he wishes to
lead up from these worlds, do a good deed; and
the same makes him, whom he wishes to lead down from
these worlds, do a bad deed. And he is the
guardian of the world, he is the king of the world, he is the
lord of the universe, and he is my (Indra's)
self, thus let it be known, yea, thus let it be known!

~ Chapter 4 ~
Fourth Adhyaya
4:1. There was formerly Gargya Balaki, famous as a man
of great reading; for it was said of him that he
lived among the Usinaras, among the Satvat-Matsyas,
the Kuru-Pankalas, the Kasi-Videhas. Having gone
to Agatasatru, (the king) of Kasi, he said to him: `Shall I
tell you Brahman?' Agatasatru said to him: `We
give a thousand (cows) for that speech (of yours), for
verily all people run away, saying, "Ganaka (the
king of Mithila) is our father (patron)."'
4:2. 
Brihad-AranyakaKaushitaki-BrahmanaUpanishad
Upanishad.
i. Aditye purushah.
i. Id.
atishthah sarvesham
brihat pandaravasa
bhutanam murdha
(panduravasa)
raga.
atishthah sarvesham
bhutanam murdha.
ii. Kandre purushah.
ii. Kandramasi.
brihat pandaravasah
somo raga, annasyatma.
somo raga. (Nasyannam Only annasyatma.
kshiyate, is the
reward.)
iii. Vidyuti purushah. iii. Id.
tegasvi.
tegasy atma.
satya-syatma.
iiib. stanayitnau purushah.
sabdasyatma.
iv. Akase purushah.
iv. Id. (5)
purnam apravarti.
purnam apravarti
brahma.
apravritti.
v. Vayau purushah.
indro vaikuntho
v. Id. (4)
Id.
'paragita sena. 
vi. Agnau purushah.
vishasahih.
vi. Id.
Id.
vii. Apsu purushah.
pratirupah.
vii. Id.
namnasyatma.
tegasa atma.
viii. Adarse purushah. viii. Id.
rokishnuh.
pratirupah.
viiib. pratisrutkayam
purushah. (9)
dvitiyo `napagah.
asuh.
ix. Yantam paskak
ix. Yah sabdah
khabdah.
purusham anveti.
(10) sabde.
asuh.
Id. mrityuh.
x. Dikshu purushah.
x. Deest.
dvitiyo `napagah.
xi. Khayamayah
purushah.
mrityuh.
x. Khayapurushah. (8b)
khayayam.
Id. dvitiyo 'napagah.
xii. Atmani purushah. xi. Sarirah purushah.
atmanvi.
(12) sarire purushah.
pragapatih. 
xii. Yah pragna atma,
yenaitat suptah
svapnaya karati.
Yamo raga. (11)
purushah
svapnaya karati
yamo raga.
xiii. Dakshine 'kshan
purushah.
namna (vaka) atma,
agner atma,
gyotisha atma.
xv. Savye `kshan
purushah.
satyasyatma, vidyuta
atma, tegasa atma.
4:3. Balaki said: `The person that is in the sun, on him I
meditate (as Brahman).'
Agatasatru said to him: `No, no! do not challenge me (to
a disputation) on this. I meditate on him who
is called great, clad in white raiment, the supreme, the
head of all beings. Whoso meditates on him thus,
becomes supreme, and the head of all beings.'
4:4. Balaki said: `The person that is in the moon, on him I
meditate.'
Agatasatru said to him: `Do not challenge me on this. I
meditate on him as Soma, the king, the self,
(source) of all food. Whoso meditates on him thus,
becomes the self, (source) of all food.'
4:5. Balaki said: `The person that is in the lightning, on
him I meditate.'
Agatasatru said to him: `Do not challenge me on this. I
meditate on him as the self in light. Whoso
meditates on him thus, becomes the self in light.'
4:6. Balaki said: `The person that is in the thunder, on
him I meditate.'
Agatasatru said to him: `Do not challenge me on this. I
meditate on him as the self of sound. Whoso
meditates on him thus, becomes the self of sound.'
4:7. Balaki said: `The person that is in the ether, on him I
meditate.'
Agatasatru said to him: `Do not challenge me on this. I
meditate on him as the full, quiescent Brahman.
Whoso meditates on him thus, is filled with offspring and
cattle. Neither he himself nor his offspring dies
before the time.'
4:8. Balaki said: `The person that is in the air, on him I
meditate.'
Agatasatru said to him: `Do not challenge me on this. I
meditate on him as Indra Vaikuntha, as the
unconquerable army. Whoso meditates on him thus,
becomes victorious, unconquerable, conquering his
enemies.'
4:9. Balaki said: `The person that is in the fire, on him I
meditate.'
Agatasatru said to him: `Do not challenge me on this. I
meditate on him as powerful. Whoso meditates
on him thus, becomes powerful among others.'
4:10. Balaki said: `The person that is in the water, on him
I meditate.' 
Agatasatru said to him: `Do not challenge me on this. I
meditate on him as the self of the name. Whoso
meditates on him thus, becomes the self of the name.'
So far with regard to deities (mythological); now
with regard to the body (physiological).
4:11. Balaki said: `The person that is in the mirror, on him
I meditate.'
Agatasatru said to him: `Do not challenge me on this. I
meditate on him as the likeness. Whoso
meditates on him thus, to him a son is born in his family
who is his likeness, not one who is not his
likeness.'
4:12. Balaki said: `The person that is in the echo, on him
I meditate.'
Agatasatru said to him: `Do not challenge me on this. I
meditate on him as the second, who never goes
away. Whoso meditates on him thus, he gets a second
from his second (his wife), he becomes doubled.
4:13. Balaki said: `The sound that follows a man, on that
I meditate.
Agatasatru said to him: `Do not challenge me on this. I
meditate on him as life. Whoso meditates on
him thus, neither he himself nor his offspring will faint
before the time.'
4:14. Balaki said: `The person that is in the shadow, on
him I meditate.'
Agatasatru said to him: `Do not challenge me on this. I
meditate on him as death. Whoso meditates on
him thus, neither he himself nor his offspring will die
before the time.'
4:15. Balaki said: `The person that is embodied, on him I
meditate.'
Agatasatru said to him: `Do not challenge me on this. I
meditate on him as Lord of creatures. Whoso 
meditates on him thus, is multiplied in offspring and
cattle.'
4:16. Balaki said: `The Self which is conscious (pragna),
and by whom he who sleeps here, walks about
in sleep, on him I meditate.'
Agatasatru said to him: `Do not challenge me on this. I
meditate on him as Yama the king. Whoso
meditates on him thus, everything is subdued for his
excellencies.'
4:17. Balaki said: `The person that is in the right eye, on
him I meditate.'
Agatastru said to him: `Do not challenge me on this. I
meditate on him as the self of the name, as the
self of fire, as the self of splendour. Whoso meditates on
him thus, he becomes the self of these.'
4:18. Balaki said: `The person that is in the left eye, on
him I meditate.'
Agatastru said to him: `Do not challenge me on this. I
meditate on him as the self of the true, as the self
of lightning, as the self of light. Whoso meditates on him
thus, he becomes the self of these.'
4:19. After this Balaki became silent. Agatastru said to
him: `Thus far only (do you know), O Balaki?'
`Thus far only,' replied Balaki.
Then Agatastru said to him: `Vainly did you challenge
me, saying: `Shall I tell you Brahman? O Balaki,
he who is the maker of those persons (whom you
mentioned), he of whom all this is the work, he alone is
to be known.'
Thereupon Balaki came, carrying fuel in his hand,
saying: `May I come to you as a pupil?' Agatastru
said to him: `I deem it improper that a Kshatriya should
initiate a Brahmana. Come, I shall make you
know clearly.' Then taking him by the hand, he went
forth. And the two together came to a person who
was asleep. And Agatastru called him, saying: `Thou
great one, clad in white raiment, Soma, King.' But 
he remained lying. Then he pushed him with a stick, and
he rose at once. Then said Agatastru to him:
`Balaki, where did this person here sleep? Where was
he? Whence came he thus back?' Balaki did not
know.
4:20. And Agatastru said to him: `Where this person here
slept, where he was, whence he thus came
back, is this: The arteries of the heart called Hita extend
from the heart of the person towards the
surrounding body. Small as a hair divided a thousand
times, they stand full of a thin fluid of various
colours, white, black, yellow, red. In these the person is
when sleeping he sees no dream.
Then he becomes one with that prana alone. Then
speech goes to him with all names, the eye with all
forms, the ear with all sounds, the mind with all thoughts.
And when he awakes, then, as from a burning
fire, sparks proceed in all directions, thus from that self
the pranas (speech, &c.) proceed, each towards its
place, from the pranas the gods, from the gods the
worlds. And as a razor might be fitted in a razor-case,
or as fire in the fire-place (the arani on the altar), even
thus this conscious self enters the self of the body
(considers the body as himself) to the very hairs and
nails. And the other selfs (such as speech, &c.)
follow that self, as his people follow the master of the
house. And as the master feeds with his people,
nay, as his people feed on the master, thus does this
conscious self feed with the other selfs, as a master
with his people, and the other selfs follow him, as his
people follow the master. So long as Indra did not
understand that self, the Asuras conquered him. When
he understood it, he conquered the Asuras and
obtained the pre-eminence among all gods, sovereignty,
supremacy. And thus also he who knows this
obtains pre-eminence among all beings, sovereignty,
supremacy, yea, he who knows this.

