Part 1
First Aranyaka
~ Chapter 1 ~
First Adhyaya
Section 1
First Khanda
1, 1-1:1. Now follows the Mahavrata ceremony.
1, 1-1:2. After having killed Vritra, Indra became great.
When he became great, then there was the
Mahavrata (the great work). This is why the Mahavrata
ceremony is called Mahavrata.
1, 1-1:3. Some people say: `Let the priest make two
(recitations with the offering of the) agya (ghee) on
that day,' but the right thing is one.
1, 1-1:4. He who desires prosperity should use the hymn,
pra vo devayagnaye (Rv. 3, 13, 1).
1, 1-1:5. He who desires increase should use the hymn,
viso viso atithim (Rv. VIII, 74, 1).
1, 1-1:6. The people (visah) indeed are increase, and
therefore he (the sacrificer) becomes increased.
1, 1-1:7. But (some say), there is the word atithim (in that
hymn, which means a guest or stranger, asking
for food). Let him not therefore take that hymn. Verily,
the atithi (stranger) is able to go begging.
1, 1-1:8. `No,' he said, `let him take that hymn.
1, 1-1:9. `For he who follows the good road and obtains
distinction, he is an atithi (guest). 
1, 1-1:10. `They do not consider him who is not so,
worthy to be (called) an atithi (guest).
1, 1-1:11. `Therefore let him by all means take that
hymn.'
1, 1-1:12. If he takes that hymn, let him place the
(second) tristich, aganma vritrahantamam, `we came
near to the victorious,' first.
1, 1-1:13. For people worship the whole year (performing
the Gavamayana sacrifice) wishing for this day
(the last but one) they do come near.
1, 1-1:14. The (next following) three tristichs begin with
an Anushtubh. Now Brahman is Gayatri,
speech is Anushtubh. He thus joins speech with
Brahman.
1, 1-1:15. He who desires glory should use the hymn,
abodhy agnih samidha gananam (Rv. 5, 1, 1).
1, 1-1:16. He who desires offspring and cattle should use
the hymn, hotaganishta ketanah (Rv. 2, 5, 1).
Section 2
Second Khanda
1, 1-2:1. He who desires proper food should use the
hymn, agnim naro didhitibhih (Rv. 7, 1, 1).
1, 1-2:2. Verily, Agni (fire) is the eater of food.
In the other (recitations accompanying the) offerings of
agya (where Agni is likewise mentioned) the
worshippers come more slowly near to Agni (because the
name of Agni does not stand at the beginning of
the hymn). But here a worshipper obtains proper food at
once, he strikes down evil at once.
1, 1-2:3. Through the words (occurring in the second foot
of the first verse), hastakyuti ganayanta, `they
caused the birth of Agni by moving their arms,' the hymn
becomes endowed with (the word) birth. Verily, 
the sacrificer is born from this day of the sacrifice, and
therefore the hymn is endowed with (the word)
birth.
1, 1-2:4. There are four metrical feet (in the Trishtubh
verses of this hymn). Verily, cattle have four feet,
therefore they serve for the gaining of cattle.
1, 1-2:5. There are three metrical feet (in the Virag
verses of this hymn). Verily, three are these threefold
worlds. Therefore they serve for the conquest of the
worlds.
1, 1-2:6. These (the Trishtubh and Virag verses of the
hymn) form two metres, which form a support
(pratishtha). Verily, man is supported by two (feet), cattle
by four feet. Therefore this hymn places the
sacrificer who stands on two feet among cattle which
stand on four.
1, 1-2:7. By saying them straight on there are twenty-five
verses in this hymn. Man also consists of
twenty-five. There are ten fingers on his hands, ten toes
on his feet, two legs, two arms, and the trunk
(atman) the twenty-fifth. He adorns that trunk, the twentyfifth, by this hymn.
1, 1-2:8. And then this day (of the sacrifice) consists of
twenty-five, and the Stoma hymn of that day
consists of twenty-five (verses); it becomes the same
through the same. Therefore these two, the day and
the hymn, are twenty-five.
1, 1-2:9. These twenty-five verses, by repeating the first
thrice and the last thrice, become thirty less one.
This is a Virag verse (consisting of thirty syllables), too
small by one. Into the small (heart) the vital
spirits are placed, into the small stomach food is placed,
therefore this Virag, small by one, serves for the
obtainment of those desires.
1, 1-2:10. He who knows this, obtains those desires.
1, 1-2:11. The verses (contained in the hymn agnim naro
didhitibhih) become the Brihati metre and the 
Virag metre, (they become) the perfection which belongs
to that day (the mahavrata). Then they also
become Anushtubh, for the offerings of agya (ghee) dwell
in Anushtubhs.
Section 3
Third Khanda
1, 1-3:1. Some say: `Let him take a Gayatri hymn for the
Pra-uga. Verily, Gayatri is brightness and glory
of countenance, and thus the sacrificer becomes bright
and glorious.'
1, 1-3:2. Others say: `Let him take a Ushnih hymn for the
Pra-uga. Verily, Ushnih is life, and thus the
sacrificer has a long life.'
Others say: `Let him take an Anushtubh hymn for the Prauga. Verily, Anushtubh is valour, and it serves
for obtaining valour.'
Others say: `Let him take a Brihati hymn for the Pra-uga.
Verily, Brihati is fortune, and thus the
sacrificer becomes fortunate.'
Others say: `Let him take a Pankti hymn for the Pra-uga.
Verily, Pankti is food, and thus the sacrificer
becomes rich in food.'
Others say: `Let him take a Trishtubh hymn for the Prauga. Verily, Trishtubh is strength, and thus the
sacrificer becomes strong.'
Others say: `Let him take a Gagati hymn for the Pra-uga.
Verily, cattle is Gagati-like, and thus the
sacrificer becomes rich in cattle.'
1, 1-3:3. But we say: `Let him take a Gayatri hymn only.
Verily, Gayatri is Brahman, and that day (the
mahavrata) is (for the attainment of) Brahman. Thus he
obtains Brahman by means of Brahman.
1, 1-3:4. `And it must be a Gayatri hymn by
Madhukkhandas, 
1, 1-3:5. `For Madhukkhandas is called Madhukkhandas,
because he wishes (khandati) for honey
(madhu) for the Rishis.
1, 1-3:6. `Now food verily is honey, all is honey, all
desires are honey, and thus if he recites the hymn of
Madhukkhandas, it serves for the attainment of all
desires.
1, 1-3:7. `He who knows this, obtains all desires.'
This (Gayatri pra-uga), according to the one-day (ekaha)
ceremonial, is perfect in form. On that day (the
mahavrata) much is done now and then which has to be
hidden, and has to be atoned for (by recitation of
hymns). Atonement (santi) is rest, the one-day sacrifice.
Therefore at the end of the year (on the last day
but one of the sacrifice that lasts a whole year) the
sacrificers rest on this atonement as their rest.
1, 1-3:8. He who knows this rests firm, and they also for
whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites this
hymn.
Section 4
Fourth Khanda
1, 1-4:1. Rv. 1, 2, 1-3. Vayav a yahi darsateme soma
aram kritah, `Approach, O Vayu, conspicuous,
these Somas have been made ready.' Because the word
ready occurs in these verses, therefore is this day
(of the sacrifice) ready (and auspicious) for the sacrificer
and for the gods.
1, 1-4:2. Yes, this day is ready (and auspicious) to him
who knows this, or for whom a Hotri priest who
knows this, recites.
1, 1-4:3. Rv. 1, 2, 4-6. Indravayu ime suta, a yatam upa
nishkritam, `Indra and Vayu, these Somas are
prepared, come hither towards what has been prepared.'
By nishkrita, prepared, he means what has been
well prepared (samskrita).
1, 1-4:4. Indra and Vayu go to what has been prepared
by him who knows this, or for whom a Hotri priest
who knows this, recites.
1, 1-4:5. Rv. 1, 2, 7. Mitram huve putadaksham, dhiyam
ghritakim sadhanta, `I call Mitra of holy
strength; (he and Varuna) they fulfil the prayer
accompanied with clarified butter.' Verily, speech is the
prayer accompanied with clarified butter.
1, 1-4:6. Speech is given to him who knows this, or for
whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites.
1, 1-4:7. Rv. 1, 3, 1. Asvina yagvarir ishah, `O Asvinau,
(eat) the sacrificial offerings.' Verily, the
sacrificial offerings are food, and this serves for the
acquirement of food.
1, 1-4:8. Rv. 1, 3, 3. A yatam rudravartani, `Come hither,
ye Rudravartani.'
1, 1-4:9. The Asvinau go to the sacrifice of him who
knows this, or for whom a Hotri priest who knows
this, recites.
1, 1-4:10. Rv. 1, 3, 4-6. Indra yahi kitrabhano, indra yahi
dhiyeshitah, indra yahi tutugana, `Come
hither, Indra, of bright splendour, Come hither, Indra,
called by prayer, Come hither, Indra, quickly!'
Thus he recites, Come hither, come hither!
1, 1-4:11. Indra comes to the sacrifice of him who knows
this, or for whom a Hotri priest who knows this,
recites.
1, 1-4:12. Rv. 1, 3, 7. Omasas karshanidhrito visve
devasa a gata, `Visve Devas, protectors, supporters of
men, come hither!'
1, 1-4:13. Verily, the Visve Devas come to the call of him
who knows this, or for whom a Hotri priest
who knows this, recites.
1, 1-4:14. Rv. 1, 3, 7. Dasvamso dasushah sutam,
`Come ye givers to the libation of the giver!' By 
dasushah he means dadushah, i.e. to the libation of every
one that gives.
1, 1-4:15. The gods fulfil his wish, with whatever wish he
recites this verse,
1, 1-4:16. (The wish of him) who knows this, or for whom
a Hotri priest who knows this, recites.
1, 1-4:17. Rv. 1, 3, 10. Pavaka nah sarasvati yagnam
vashtu dhiyavasuh, `May the holy Sarasvati accept
our sacrifice, rich in prayer!' Speech is meant by `rich in
prayer.'
1, 1-4:18. Speech is given to him who knows this, or for
whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites.
1, 1-4:19. And when he says, `May she accept our
sacrifice!' what he means is, `May she carry off our
sacrifice!'
1, 1-4:20. If these verses are recited straight on, they are
twenty-one. Man also consists of twenty-one.
There are ten fingers on his hands, ten toes on his feet,
and the trunk the twenty-first. He adorns that
trunk, the twenty-first, by this hymn.
1, 1-4:21. By repeating the first and the last verses thrice,
they become twenty-five. The trunk is the
twenty-fifth, and Pragapati is the twenty-fifth. There are
ten fingers on his hands, ten toes on his feet, two
legs, two arms, and the trunk the twenty-fifth. He adorns
that trunk, the twenty-fifth, by this hymn.
Now this day consists of twenty-five, and the Stoma hymn
of that day consists of twenty-five: it becomes
the same through the same. Therefore these two, the
day and the hymn, are twenty-five, yea, twenty-five.

~ Chapter 2 ~
Second Adhyaya
Section 1 
First Khanda
1, 2-1:1. The two trikas, Rv. VIII, 68, 1-3, a tva ratham
yathotaye, and Rv. VIII, 2, 1-3, idam vaso sutam
andhah, form the first (pratipad) and the second
(anukara) of the Marutvatiya hymn.
1, 2-1:2. Both, as belonging to the one-day ceremonial,
are perfect in form. On that day much is done
now and then which has to be hidden, and has to be
atoned for. Atonement is rest, the one-day sacrifice.
Therefore at the end of the year the sacrificers rest on
this atonement as their rest. He who knows this
rests firm, and they also for whom a Hotri priest who
knows this, recites this hymn.
1, 2-1:3. In the second verse of (the Pragatha), indra
nediya ed ihi, pra su tira sakibhir ye ta ukthinah
(Rv. VIII, 53, 5, 6), there occurs the word ukthinah,
reciters of hymns. Verily, this day (the mahavrata) is
an uktha (hymn), and as endowed with an uktha, the form
of this day is perfect.
1, 2-1:4. In the first verse (of another Pragatha) the word
vira, strong, occurs (Rv. I, 40, 3), and as
endowed with the word vira, strong, the form of this day is
perfect.
1, 2-1:5. In the second verse (of another Pragatha) the
word suviryam, strength, occurs (Rv. I, 40, 1), and
as endowed with the word suvirya, strength, the form of
this day is perfect.
1, 2-1:6. In the first verse (of another Pragatha) the word
ukthyam, to be hymned, occurs (Rv. I, 40, 5).
Verily, this day is an uktha, and as endowed with an
uktha, the form of this day is perfect.
1, 2-1:7. In the (Dhayya) verse agnir neta (Rv. III, 20, 4)
the word vritraha, killer of Vritra, occurs. The
killing of Vritra is a form (character) of Indra, this day (the
mahavrata) belongs to Indra, and this is the
(perfect) form of that day.
1, 2-1:8. In the (Dhayya) verse tvam soma kratubhih
sukratur bhuh (Rv. I, 91, 2) the word vrisha,
powerful, occurs. Powerful is a form (character) of Indra,
this day belongs to Indra, and this is the
(perfect) form of that day.
1, 2-1:9. In the (Dhayya) verse pinvanty apah (Rv. I, 64,
6) the word vaginam, endowed with food,
occurs. Endowed with food is a form (character) of Indra,
this day belongs to Indra, and this is the
(perfect) form of that day.
1, 2-1:10. In the same verse the word stanayantam,
thundering, occurs. Endowed with thundering is a
form (character) of Indra, this day belongs to Indra, and
this is the (perfect) form of that day.
1, 2-1:11. In (the Pragatha) pra va indraya brihate (Rv.
VIII, 89, 3) (the word brihat occurs). Verily,
brihat is mahat (great), and as endowed with mahat,
great, the form of this day (mahavrata) is perfect.
1, 2-1:12. In (the Pragatha) brihad indraya gayata (Rv.
VIII, 89, 1) (the word brihat occurs). Verily,
brihat is mahat (great), and as endowed with mahat, the
form of this day is perfect.
1, 2-1:13. In (the Pragatha) nakih sudaso ratham pary
asa na riramad (Rv. VII, 32, 10) the words paryasa
(he moved round) and na riramad (he did not enjoy)
occur, and as endowed with the words paryasta and
ranti the form of this day is perfect.
He recites all (these) Pragathas, in order to obtain all the
days (of the sacrifice), all the Ukthas, all the
Prishthas, all the Sastras, all the Pra-ugas, and all the
Savanas (libations).
Section 2
Second Khanda
1, 2-2:1. He recites the hymn, asat su me garitah
sabhivegah (Rv. X, 27, 1), (and in it the word)
satyadhvritam, the destroyer of truth. Verily, that day is
truth, and as endowed with the word satya, truth, 
the form of this day is perfect.
1, 2-2:2. That hymn is composed by Vasukra. Verily,
Vasukra is Brahman, and that day is Brahman.
Thus he obtains Brahman by means of Brahman.
1, 2-2:3. Here they say: `Why then is that Marutvatiya
hymn completed by the hymn of Vasukra?' Surely
because no other Rishi but Vasukra brought out a
Marutvatiya hymn, or divided it properly. Therefore
that Marutvatiya hymn is completed by the hymn of
Vasukra.
1, 2-2:4. That hymn, asat su me, is not definitely
addressed to any deity, and is therefore supposed to be
addressed to Pragapati. Verily, Pragapati is indefinite,
and therefore the hymn serves to win Pragapati.
1, 2-2:5. Once in the hymn (Rv. X, 27, 22) he defines
Indra (indraya sunvat); therefore it does not fall off
from its form, as connected with Indra.
1, 2-2:6. He recites the hymn (Rv. 6, 17, 1) piba somam
abhi yam ugra tardah.
1, 2-2:7. In the verse urvam gavyam mahi grinana indra
the word mahi, great, occurs. Endowed with the
word mahat, the form of this day is perfect.
1, 2-2:8. That hymn is composed by Bharadvaga, and
Bharadvaga was he who knew most, who lived
longest, and performed the greatest austerities among
the Rishis, and by this hymn he drove away evil.
Therefore if he recites the hymn of Bharadvaga, then,
after having driven away evil, he becomes learned,
long-lived, and full of austerities.
1, 2-2:9. He recites the hymn kaya subha savayasah
sanilah (Rv. 1, 165, 1).
1, 2-2:10. In the verse a sasate prati haryanty uktha (Rv.
1, 165, 4) the word uktha, occurs. Verily, that
day (the mahavrata) is uktha (hymn). Endowed with the
word uktha, the form of this day becomes
perfect. 
1, 2-2:11. That hymn is called Kayasubhiya. Verily, that
hymn, which is called Kayasubhiya, is mutual
understanding and it is lasting. By means of it Indra,
Agastya, and the Maruts came to a mutual
understanding. Therefore, if he recites the Kayasubhiya
hymn, it serves for mutual understanding.
1, 2-2:12. The same hymn is also long life. Therefore, if
the sacrificer is dear to the Hotri, let him recite
the Kayasubhiya hymn for him.
1, 2-2:13. He recites the hymn marutvan indra vrishabo
ranaya (Rv. 3, 47, 1).
1, 2-2:14. In it the words indra vrishabha (powerful)
occur. Verily, powerful is a form of Indra, this day
belongs to Indra, and this is the perfect form of that day.
1, 2-2:15. That hymn is composed by Visvamitra. Verily,
Visvamitra was the friend (mitra) of all
(visva).
1, 2-2:16. Everybody is the friend of him who knows this,
and for whom a Hotri priest who knows this,
recites this hymn.
1, 2-2:17. The next hymn, ganishtha ugrah sahase
turaya (Rv. 1, 73, 1), forms a Nividdhana, and,
according to the one-day (ekaha) ceremonial, is perfect in
form. On that day much is done now and then
which has to be hidden, and has to be atoned for (by
recitation of hymns). Atonement is rest, the one-day
sacrifice. Therefore at the end of the year (on the last
day but one of the sacrifice that lasts a whole year)
the sacrificers rest on this atonement as their rest.
He who knows this rests firm, and they also for whom a
Hotri priest who knows this, recites this hymn.
1, 2-2:18. These, if recited straight on, are ninety-seven
verses. The ninety are three Virag, each
consisting of thirty, and then the seven verses which are
over. Whatever is the praise of the seven, is the
praise of ninety also.
1, 2-2:19. By repeating the first and last verses three
times each, they become one hundred and one
verses.
1, 2-2:20. There are five fingers, of four joints each, two
pits (in the elbow and the arm), the arm, the eye,
the shoulder-blade; this makes twenty-five. The other
three parts have likewise twenty-five each. That
makes a hundred, and the trunk is the one hundred and
first.
1, 2-2:21. Hundred is life, health, strength, brightness.
The sacrificer as the one hundred and first rests
in life, health, strength, and brightness.
1, 2-2:22. These verses become Trishtubh, for the
noonday-libation consists of Trishtubh verses.
Section 3
Third Khanda
1, 2-3:1. They say: `What is the meaning of prenkha,
swing?' Verily, he is the swing, who blows (the
wind). He indeed goes forward (pra + inkhate) in these
worlds, and that is why the swing is called
prenkha.
1, 2-3:2. Some say, that there should be one plank,
because the wind blows in one way, and it should be
like the wind.
1, 2-3:3. That is not to be regarded.
1, 2-3:4. Some say, there should be three planks,
because there are these three threefold worlds, and it
should be like them.
1, 2-3:5. That is not to be regarded.
1, 2-3:6. Let there be two, for these two worlds (the earth
and heaven) are seen as if most real, while the
ether (space) between the two is the sky (antariksha).
Therefore let there be two planks.
1, 2-3:7. Let them be made of Udumbara wood. Verily,
the Udumbara tree is sap and eatable food, and
thus it serves to obtain sap and eatable food.
1, 2-3:8. Let them be elevated in the middle (between the
earth and the cross-beam). Food, if placed in
the middle, delights man, and thus he places the
sacrificer in the middle of eatable food.
1, 2-3:9. There are two kinds of rope, twisted towards the
right and twisted towards the left. The right
ropes serve for some animals, the left ropes for others. If
there are both kinds of rope, they serve for the
attainment of both kinds of cattle.
1, 2-3:10. Let them be made of Darbha (Kusa grass), for
among plants Darbha is free from evil, therefore
they should be made of Darbha grass.
Section 4
Fourth Khanda
1, 2-4:1. Some say: `Let the swing be one ell (aratni)
above the ground, for by that measure verily the
Svarga worlds are measured.' That is not to be regarded.
1, 2-4:2. Others say: `Let it be one span (pradesa), for by
that measure verily the vital airs were
measured.' That is not to be regarded.
1, 2-4:3. Let it be one fist (mushti), for by that measure
verily all eatable food is made, and by that
measure all eatable food is taken; therefore let it be one
fist above the ground.
1, 2-4:4. They say: `Let him mount the swing from east to
west, like he who shines; for the sun mounts
these worlds from east to west.' That is not to be
regarded.
1, 2-4:5. Others say: `Let him mount the swing sideways,
for people mount a horse sideways, thinking
that thus they will obtain all desires.' That is not to be
regarded. 
1, 2-4:6. They say: `Let him mount the swing from
behind, for people mount a ship from behind, and this
swing is a ship in which to go to heaven.' Therefore let
him mount it from behind.
1, 2-4:7. Let him touch the swing with his chin (khubuka).
The parrot (suka) thus mounts a tree, and he
is of all birds the one who eats most food. Therefore let
him touch it with his chin.
1, 2-4:8. Let him mount the swing with his arms. The
hawk swoops thus on birds and on trees, and he is
of all birds the strongest. Therefore let him mount with his
arms.
1, 2-4:9. Let him not withdraw one foot (the right or left)
from the earth, for fear that he may lose his
hold.
1, 2-4:10. The Hotri mounts the swing, the Udgatri the
seat made of Udumbara wood. The swing is
masculine, the seat feminine, and they form a union.
Thus he makes a union at the beginning of the
uktha in order to get offspring.
1, 2-4:11. He who knows this, gets offspring and cattle.
1, 2-4:12. Next the swing is food, the seat fortune. Thus
he mounts and obtains food and fortune.
1, 2-4:13. The Hotrakas (the Prasastri,
Brahmanakkhamsin, Potri, Neshtri, Agnidhra, and
Akkhavaka)
together with the Brahman sit down on cushions made of
grass, reeds, leaves, &c.
1, 2-4:14. Plants and trees, after they have grown up,
bear fruit. Thus if the priests mount on that day
altogether (on their seats), they mount on solid and fluid
as their proper food. Therefore this serves for
the attainment of solid as proper food.
1, 2-4:15. Some say: `Let him descend after saying
vashat.' That is not to be regarded. For, verily, that
respect is not shown which is shown to one who does not
see it. 
1, 2-4:16. Others say: `Let him descend after he has
taken the food in his hand.' That is not to be
regarded. For, verily, that respect is not shown which is
shown to one after he has approached quite close.
1, 2-4:17. Let him descend after he has seen the food.
For, verily, that is real respect which is shown to
one when he sees it. Only after having actually seen the
food (that is brought to the sacrifice), let him
descend from the swing.
1, 2-4:18. Let him descend turning towards the east, for
in the east the seed of the gods springs up.
Therefore let him rise turning towards the east, yea,
turning towards the east.

~ Chapter 3 ~
Third Adhyaya
Section 1
First Khanda
1, 3-1:1. Let him begin this day with singing `Him,' thus
they say.
1, 3-1:2. Verily, the sound Him is Brahman, that day also
is Brahman. He who knows this, obtains
Brahman even by Brahman.
1, 3-1:3. As he begins with the sound Him, surely that
masculine sound of Him and the feminine Rik (the
verse) make a couple. Thus he makes a couple at the
beginning of the hymn in order to get offspring. He
who knows this, gets cattle and offspring.
1, 3-1:4. Or, as he begins with the sound Him, surely like
a wooden spade, so the sound Him serves to dig
up Brahman (the sap of the Veda). And as a man wishes
to dig up any, even the hardest soil, with a
spade, thus he digs up Brahman. 
1, 3-1:5. He who knows this digs up, by means of the
sound Him, everything he may desire.
1, 3-1:6. If he begins with the sound Him, that sound is
the holding apart of divine and human speech.
Therefore, he who begins, after having uttered the sound
Him, holds apart divine and human speech.
Section 2
Second Khanda
1, 3-2:1. And here they ask: `What is the beginning of
this day?' Let him say: `Mind and speech.'
1, 3-2:2. All desires dwell in the one (mind), the other
yields all desires.
1, 3-2:3. All desires dwell in the mind, for with the mind
he conceives all desires.
1, 3-2:4. All desires come to him who knows this.
1, 3-2:5. Speech yields all desires, for with speech he
declares all his desires.
1, 3-2:6. Speech yields all desires to him who knows this.
1, 3-2:7. Here they say: `Let him not begin this day with a
Rik, a Yagus, or a Saman verse (divine
speech), for it is said, he should not start with a Rik, a
Yagus, or a Saman.'
1, 3-2:8. Therefore, let him say these Vyahritis (sacred
interjections) first.
1, 3-2:9. These interjections Bhus, Bhuvas, Svar are the
three Vedas, Bhus the Rig-veda, Bhuvas the
Yagur-veda, Svar the Sama-veda. Therefore (by
intercalating these) he does not begin simply with a Rik,
Yagus, or Saman verse, he does not start with a Rik,
Yagus, or Saman verse.
Section 3
Third Khanda 
1, 3-3:1. He begins with tad, this, (the first word of the
first hymn, tad id asa). Verily `this, this' is food,
and thus he obtains food.
1, 3-3:2. Pragapati indeed uttered this as the first word,
consisting of one or two syllables, viz. tata and
tata (or tat). And thus does a child, as soon as he begins
to speak, utter the word, consisting of one or two
syllables, viz. tata and tata (or tat). With this very word,
consisting of tat or tatta, he begins.
1, 3-3:3. This has been said by a Rishi (Rv. X, 71, 1):
1, 3-3:4. `O Brihaspati, the first point of speech;' for this
is the first and highest point of speech.
1, 3-3:5. `That which you have uttered, making it a
name;' for names are made by speech.
1, 3-3:6. `That (name) which was the best and without a
flaw;' for this is the best and without a flaw.
1, 3-3:7. `That which was hidden by their love, is made
manifest;' for this was hidden in the body, viz.
those deities (which enter the body, Agni as voice,
entering the mouth, &c.); and that was manifest among
the gods in heaven. This is what was intended by the
verse.
Section 4
Fourth Khanda
1, 3-4:1. He begins with: `That indeed was the oldest in
the worlds;' for that (the Brahman) is verily
the oldest in the worlds.
1, 3-4:2. `Whence was born the fierce one, endowed with
brilliant force;' for from it was born the
fierce one, who is endowed with brilliant force.
1, 3-4:3. `When born he at once destroys the enemies;'
for he at once when born struck down the evil
one. 
1, 3-4:4. `He after whom all friends rejoice;' verily all
friends are the creatures, and they rejoice after
him, saying, `He has risen, he has risen.'
1, 3-4:5. `Growing by strength, the almighty;' for he (the
sun) does grow by strength, the almighty.
1, 3-4:6. `He, as enemy, causes fear to the slave;' for
everything is afraid of him.
1, 3-4:7. `Taking the breathing and the not-breathing;'
this means the living and the lifeless.
1, 3-4:8. `Whatever has been offered at feasts came to
thee;' this means everything is in thy power.
1, 3-4:9. `All turn their thought also on thee;' this means
all these beings, all minds, all thoughts also
turn to thee.
1, 3-4:10. `When these two become three protectors;'
i.e. when these two united beget offspring.
1, 3-4:11. He who knows this, gets offspring and cattle.
1, 3-4:12. `Join what is sweeter than sweet (offspring)
with the sweet (the parents);'- for the couple (father
and mother) is sweet, the offspring is sweet, and he thus
joins the offspring with the couple.
1, 3-4:13. `And this (the son, when married) being very
sweet, conquered through the sweet;' i.e. the
couple is sweet, the offspring is sweet, and thus through
the couple he conquers offspring.
1, 3-4:14. This is declared by a Rishi: `Because he
(Pragapati) raised his body (the hymn tad id asa or the
Veda in general) in the body (of the sacrificer)' (therefore
that Nishkevalya hymn is praised); i.e. this
body, consisting of the Veda, in that corporeal form (of
the sacrificer).
1, 3-4:15. `Then let this body indeed be the medicine of
that body;' i.e. this body, consisting of the
Veda, of that corporeal form (of the sacrificer). 
1, 3-4:16. Of this (the first foot of Rv. 10, 120, 1) the eight
syllables are Gayatri, the eleven syllables are
Trishtubh, the twelve syllables are Gagati, the ten
syllables are Virag. The Virag, consisting of ten
syllables, rests in these three metres.
1, 3-4:17. The word purusha, consisting of three
syllables, that indeed goes into the Virag.
1, 3-4:18. Verily, these are all metres, these (Gayatri,
Trishtubh, Gagati) having the Virag as the fourth.
In this manner this day is complete in all metres to him
who knows this.
Section 5
Fifth Khanda
1, 3-5:1. He extends these (verses) by (interpolating) the
sound. Verily, the sound is purusha, man.
Therefore every man when he speaks, sounds loud, as it
were.
1, 3-5:2. At the end of each foot of the first verse of the
hymn tad id asa, he inserts one foot of the second
verse of hymn Rv. 8, 69, nadam va odatinam, &c. Thus
the verse is to be recited as follows:
Tad id asa bhuvaneshu gyeshtham pu
nadam va odatinam,
Yato gagna ugras tveshanrimno ru
nadam yoyuvatinam,
Sadyo gagnano ni rinati satrun
patim vo aghnyanam,
Anu yam visve madanti umah sho
dhenunam ishudhyasi.
In nadam va odatinam (Rv. 8, 69, 2), odati are the
waters in heaven, for they water all this; and they are 
the waters in the mouth, for they water all good food.
In nadam yoyuvatinam (Rv. 8, 69, 2), yoyuvati are the
waters in the sky, for they seem to inundate; and
they are the waters of perspiration, for they seem to run
continually.
1, 3-5:4. In patim vo aghnyanam (Rv. 8, 69, 2), aghnya
are the waters which spring from the smoke of
fire, and they are the waters which spring from the organ.
1, 3-5:5. In dhenunam ishudhyasi (Rv. 8, 69, 2), the
dhenu (cows) are the waters, for they delight all this;
and ishudhyasi means, thou art food.
1, 3-5:6. He extends a Trishtubh and an Anushtubh.
Trishtubh is the man, Anushtubh the wife, and they
make a couple. Therefore does a man, after having
found a wife, consider himself a more perfect man.
1, 3-5:7. These verses, by repeating the first three times,
become twenty-five. The trunk is the twentyfifth, and Pragapati is the twenty-fifth. There are ten
fingers on his hands, ten toes on his feet, two legs,
two arms, and the trunk the twenty-fifth. He adorns that
trunk as the twenty-fifth. Now this day consists
of twenty-five, and the Stoma hymn of that day consists of
twenty-five: it becomes the same through the
same. Therefore the two, the day and the hymn, are
twenty-five.
Section 6
Sixth Khanda
1, 3-6 This is an exact repetition of the third khanda.
According to the commentator, the third khanda
was intended for the glory of the first word tad, while the
sixth is intended for the glory of the whole
hymn.
Section 7
Seventh Khanda
1, 3-7:1. He begins with the hymn, Tad id asa
bhuvaneshu gyeshtham (Rv. 10, 120). Verily, gyeshtha,
the oldest, is mahat, great. Endowed with mahat the form
of this day is perfect.
1, 3-7:2. Then follows the hymn, Tam su te kirtim
maghavan mahitva (Rv. 10, 54), with the auspicious
word mahitva.
1, 3-7:3. Then follows the hymn, Bhuya id vavridhe
viryaya (Rv. 4, 30), with the auspicious word virya.
1, 3-7:4. Then follows the hymn, Nrinam u tva nritamam
gobhir ukthaih (Rv. 1, 51, 4), with the
auspicious word uktha.
1, 3-7:5. He extends the first two padas, which are too
small, by one syllable (Rv. 10, 120, 1 a, and Rv. 8,
69, 2 a). Into the small heart the vital spirits are placed,
into the small stomach food is placed. It serves
for the attainment of these desires. He who knows this,
obtains these desires.
1, 3-7:6. The two feet, each consisting of ten syllables
(Rv. 10, 120, 1 a, b), serve for the gaining of both
kinds of food, of what has feet (animal food), and what
has no feet (vegetable food).
1, 3-7:7. They come to be of eighteen syllables each. Of
those which are ten, nine are the pranas
(openings of the body), the tenth is the (vital) self. This is
the perfection of the (vital) self. Eight syllables
remain in each. He who knows them, obtains whatever
he desires.
Section 8
Eighth Khanda
1, 3-8:1. He extends (these verses) by (interpolating) the
sound. Verily, breath (prana) is sound.
Therefore every breath when it sounds, sounds loud, as it
were.
1, 3-8:2. The verse (8, 69, 2) nadam va odatinam, &c., is
by its syllables an Ushnih, by its feet an 
Anushtubh. Ushnih is life, Anushtubh, speech. He thus
places life and speech in him (the sacrificer.)
1, 3-8:3. By repeating the first verse three times, they
become twenty-five. The trunk is the twenty-fifth,
and Pragapati is the twenty-fifth. There are ten fingers on
his hands, ten toes on his feet, two legs, two
arms, and the trunk the twenty-fifth. He adorns that trunk
as the twenty-fifth. Now this day consists of
twenty-five, and the Stoma hymn of that day consists of
twenty-five: it becomes the same through the
same. Therefore the two, the day and the hymn, are
twenty-five. This is the twenty-fifth with regard to
the body.
1, 3-8:4. Next, with regard to the deities: The eye, the
ear, the mind, speech, and breath, these five deities
(powers) have entered into that person (purusha), and
that person entered into the five deities. He is
wholly pervaded there with his limbs to the very hairs and
nails. Therefore all beings to the very insects
are born as pervaded (by the deities or senses).
1, 3-8:5. This has been declared by a Rishi (Rv. 10, 114,
8):
1, 3-8:6. `A thousandfold are these fifteen hymns;' for
five arise from ten.
1, 3-8:7. `As large as heaven and earth, so large is it;'
verily, the self (givatman) is as large as heaven
and earth.
1, 3-8:8. `A thousandfold are the thousand powers;' by
saying this the poet pleases the hymns (the
senses), and magnifies them.
1, 3-8:9. `As far as Brahman reaches, so far reaches
speech;' wherever there is Brahman, there is a
word; and wherever there is a word, there is Brahman,
this was intended.
1, 3-8:10. The first of the hymns among all those hymns
has nine verses. Verily, there are nine pranas
(openings), and it serves for their benefit. 
1, 3-8:11. Then follows a hymn of six verses. Verily, the
seasons are six, and it serves to obtain them.
1, 3-8:12. Then follows a hymn of five verses. Verily, the
Pankti consists of five feet. Verily, Pankti is
food, and it serves for the gaining of proper food.
1, 3-8:13. Then follows a tristich. Three are these
threefold worlds, and it serves to conquer them.
1, 3-8:14. These verses become Brihatis, that metre
being immortal, leading to the world of the Devas.
That body of verses is the trunk (of the bird represented
by the whole sastra), and thus it is. He who
knows this comes by this way (by making the verses the
trunk of the bird) near to the immortal Self, yea,
to the immortal Self.

~ Chapter 4 ~
Fourth Adhyaya
Section 1
First Khanda
1, 4-1:1. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas
is breath, and thereby he joins all joints with
breath.
1, 4-1:2. Next follow the neck verses. They recite them
as Ushnih, according to their metre.
1, 4-1:3. Next comes (again) the Sudadohas verse.
Sudadohas is breath, and thereby he joins all joints
with breath.
1, 4-1:4. Next follows the head. That is in Gayatri verses.
The Gayatri is the beginning of all metres; the
head the first of all members. It is in Arkavat verses (Rv.
1, 7, 1-9). Arka is Agni. They are nine verses.
The head consists of nine pieces. He recites the tenth
verse, and that is the skin and the hairs on the head. 
It serves for reciting one verse more than (the nine verses
contained in) the Stoma. These form the Trivrit
Stoma and the Gayatri metre, and whatever there exists,
all this is produced after the production of this
Stoma and this metre. Therefore the recitation of these
head-hymns serves for production.
1, 4-1:5. He who knows this, gets offspring and cattle.
1, 4-1:6. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Verily,
Sudadohas is breath, and thereby he joins all joints
with breath.
1, 4-1:7. Next follow the vertebrae (of the bird). These
verses are Virag (shining). Therefore man says to
man, `Thou shinest above us;' or to a stiff and proud man,
`Thou carriest thy neck stiff.' Or because the
(vertebrae of the neck) run close together, they are taken
to be the best food. For Virag is food, and food is
strength.
1, 4-1:8. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas
is breath, and thereby he joins all joints with
breath.
Section 2
Second Khanda
1, 4-2:1. Next follows the right wing. It is this world (the
earth), it is this Agni, it is speech, it is the
Rathantara, it is Vasishtha, it is a hundred. These are the
six powers (of the right wing). The Sampata
hymn (Rv. 4, 20) serves indeed for obtaining desires and
for firmness. The Pankti verse (Rv. 1, 80, 1)
serves for proper food.
1, 4-2:2. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas
is breath, thereby he joins all joints with breath.
1, 4-2:3. Next follows the left wing. It is that world
(heaven), it is that sun, it is mind, it is the Brihat, it
is Bharadvaga, it is a hundred. These are the six powers
(of the left wing). The Sampata hymn (Rv. IV,
23) serves indeed for obtaining desires and for firmness.
The Pankti verse (Rv. 1, 81, 1) serves for proper 
food.
1, 4-2:4. These two (the right and the left wings) are
deficient and excessive. The Brihat (the left wing)
is man, the Rathantara (the right wing) is woman. The
excess belongs to the man, the deficiency to the
woman. Therefore they are deficient and excessive.
1, 4-2:5. Now the left wing of a bird is verily by one
feather better, therefore the left wing is larger by one
verse.
1, 4-2:6. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas
is breath, and thereby he joins all joints with
breath.
1, 4-2:7. Next follows the tail. They are twenty-one
Dvipada verses. For there are twenty-one backward
feathers in a bird.
1, 4-2:8. Then the Ekavimsa is the support of all Stomas,
and the tail the support of all birds.
1, 4-2:9. He recites a twenty-second verse. This is made
the form of two supports. Therefore all birds
support themselves on their tail, and having supported
themselves on their tail, they fly up. For the tail is
a support.
1, 4-2:10. He (the bird and the hymn) is supported by two
decades which are Virag. The man (the
sacrificer) is supported by the two Dvipadas, the twentyfirst and twenty-second. That which forms the
bird serves for the attainment of all desires; that which
forms the man, serves for his happiness, glory,
proper food, and honour.
1, 4-2:11. Next comes a Sudadohas verse, then a
Dhayya, then a Sudadohas verse. The Sudadohas is a
man, the Dhayya a woman, therefore he recites the
Dhayya as embraced on both sides by the Sudadohas.
Therefore does the seed of both, when it is effused,
obtain oneness, and this with regard to the woman
only. Hence birth takes place in and from the woman.
Therefore he recites that Dhayya in that place. 
Section 3
Third Khanda
1, 4-3:1. He recites the eighty tristichs of Gayatris.
Verily, the eighty Gayatri tristichs are this world
(earth). Whatever there is in this world of glory,
greatness, wives, food, and honour, may I obtain it, may
I win it, may it be mine.
1, 4-3:2. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas
verily is breath. He joins this world with breath.
1, 4-3:3. He recites the eighty tristichs of Brihatis. Verily,
the eighty Brihati tristichs are the world of the
sky. Whatever there is in the world of the sky of glory,
greatness, wives, food, and honour, may I obtain
it, may I win it, may it be mine.
1, 4-3:4. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas
verily is breath. He joins the world of the sky with
breath.
1, 4-3:5. He recites the eighty tristichs of Ushnih. Verily,
the eighty Ushnih tristichs are that world, the
heaven. Whatever there is in that world of glory,
greatness, wives, food, and honour, also the divine being
of the Devas (Brahman), may I obtain it, may I win it, may
it be mine.
1, 4-3:6. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas
verily is the breath. He joins that world with
breath, yea, with breath.

~ Chapter 5 ~
Fifth Adhyaya
Section 1
First Khanda
1, 5-1:1. He recites the Vasa hymn, wishing, May
everything be in my power. 
1, 5-1:2. They (its verses) are twenty-one, for twenty-one
are the parts (the lungs, spleen, &c.) in the
belly.
1, 5-1:3. Then the Ekavimsa is verily the support of all
Stomas, and the belly the support of all food.
1, 5-1:4. They consist of different metres. Verily, the
intestines are confused, some small, some large.
1, 5-1:5. He recites them with the pranava, according to
the metre, and according to rule. Verily, the
intestines are according to rule, as it were; some shorter,
some longer.
1, 5-1:6. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas
verily is breath. He joins the joints with breath.
1, 5-1:7. After having recited that verse twelve times he
leaves it off there. These pranas are verily
twelve-fold, seven in the head, two on the breast, three
below. In these twelve places the pranas are
contained, there they are perfect. Therefore he leaves it
off there.
1, 5-1:8. The hymn indragni yuvam su nah (Rv. VIII, 40)
forms the two thighs (of the bird) belonging to
Indra and Agni, the two supports with broad bones.
1, 5-1:9. These (verses) consist of six feet, so that they
may stand firm. Man stands firm on two feet,
animals on four. He thus places man (the sacrificer),
standing on two feet, among four-footed cattle.
1, 5-1:10. The second verse has seven feet, and he
makes it into a Gayatri and Anushtubh. Gayatri is
Brahman, Anushtubh is speech; and he thus puts
together speech with Brahman.
1, 5-1:11. He recites a Trishtubh at the end. Trishtubh is
strength, and thus does he come round animals
by strength. Therefore animals come near where there is
strength (of command, &c.); they come to be
roused and to rise up, (they obey the commands of a
strong shepherd.) 
Section 2
Second Khanda
1, 5-2:1. When he recites the Nishkevalya hymn
addressed to Indra (Rv. X, 50), pra vo mahe, he inserts a
Nivid (between the fourth and fifth verses). Thus he
clearly places strength in himself (in the sastra, in
the bird, in himself).
1, 5-2:2. They are Trishtubhs and Gagatis.
1, 5-2:3. There they say: `Why does he insert a Nivid
among mixed Trishtubhs and Gagatis?' But surely
one metre would never support the Nivid of this day, nor
fill it: therefore he inserts the Nivid among
mixed Trishtubhs and Gagatis.
1, 5-2:4. Let him know that this day has three Nivids: the
Vasa hymn is a Nivid, the Valakhilyas are a
Nivid, and the Nivid itself is a Nivid. Thus let him know
that day as having three Nivids.
1, 5-2:5. Then follow the hymns vane na va (Rv. X, 29)
and yo gata eva (Rv. II, 12). In the fourth verse
of the former hymn occur the words anne samasya yad
asan manishah, and they serve for the winning of
proper food.
1, 5-2:6. Then comes an insertion. As many Trishtubh
and Gagati verses, taken from the ten Mandalas
and addressed to Indra, as they insert (between the two
above-mentioned hymns), after changing them
into Brihatis, so many years do they live beyond the
(usual) age (of one hundred years). By this insertion
age is obtained.
1, 5-2:7. After that he recites the Saganiya hymn, wishing
that cattle may always come to his offspring.
1, 5-2:8. Then he recites the Tarkshya hymn. Tarkshya
is verily welfare, and the hymn leads to welfare.
Thus (by reciting the hymn) he fares well.
1, 5-2:9. Then he recites the Ekapada (indro visvam vi
ragati), wishing, May I be everything at once, and
may I thus finish the whole work of metres.
1, 5-2:10. In reciting the hymn indram visva avivridhan
(Rv. I, 11) he intertwines the first seven verses
by intertwining their feet. There are seven pranas
(openings) in the head, and he thus places seven pranas
in the head. The eighth verse (half-verse) he does not
intertwine. The eighth is speech, and he thinks,
May my speech never be intertwined with the other
pranas. Speech therefore, though dwelling in the
same abode as the other pranas, is not intertwined with
them.
1, 5-2:11. He recites the Virag verses. Verily, Virag
verses are food, and they thus serve for the gaining of
food.
1, 5-2:12. He ends with the hymn of Vasishtha, wishing,
May I be Vasishtha!
1, 5-2:13. But let him end with the fifth verse, esha stomo
maha ugraya vahe, which, possessing the word
mahat, is auspicious.
1, 5-2:14. In the second foot of the fifth verse the word
dhuri occurs. Verily, dhuh (the place where the
horse is fastened to the car) is the end (of the car). This
day also is the end (of the sacrifice which lasts a
whole year). Thus the verse is fit for the day.
1, 5-2:15. In the third foot the word arka is auspicious.
1, 5-2:16. The last foot is: `Make our glory high as
heaven over heaven.' Thus wherever Brahmanic
speech is uttered, there his glory will be, when he who
knows this finishes with that verse. Therefore let a
man who knows this, finish (the Nishkevalya) with that
verse.
Section 3
Third Khanda
1, 5-3:1. Tat savitur vrinimahe (Rv. V, 82, 1-3) and adya
no deva savitar (Rv. V, 82, 4-6) are the
beginning (pratipad) and the next step (anukara) of the
Vaisvadeva hymn, taken from the Ekaha
ceremonial and therefore proper.
1, 5-3:2. On that day much is done now and then which
has to be hidden, and has to be atoned for.
Atonement is rest, the one-day sacrifice. Therefore at the

atonement as their rest. He who knows this rests firm,
and they also for whom a Hotri priest who knows
this, recites this hymn.
1, 5-3:3. Then (follows) the hymn addressed to Savitri,
tad devasya savitur varyam mahat (Rv. IV, 53).
Verily, mahat, great, (in this foot) is the end. This day too
is the end. Thus the verse is fit for the day.
1, 5-3:4. The hymn katara purva katara parayoh (Rv. I,
185), addressed to Dyavaprithivi, is one in which
many verses have the same ending. Verily, this day also
(the mahavrata) is one in which many receive the
same reward. Thus it is fit for the day.
1, 5-3:5. The hymn anasvo gato anabhisur ukthyah (Rv.
IV, 36) is addressed to the Ribhus.
1, 5-3:6. In the first verse the word tri (kakrah) occurs,
and trivat is verily the end. This day also is the
end (of the sacrifice). Thus the verse is fit for the day.
1, 5-3:7. The hymn asya vamasya palitasya hotuh (Rv. I,
164), addressed to the Visvedevas, is multiform.
This day also is multiform. Thus the verse is fit for the
day.
1, 5-3:8. He recites the end of it, beginning with gaurir
mimaya (Rv. I, 164, 41).
1, 5-3:9. The hymn a no bhadrah kratavo yantu visvatah
(Rv. I, 89), addressed to the Visvedevas, forms
the Nividdhana, taken from the Ekaha ceremonial, and
therefore proper.
1, 5-3:10. On that day much is done now and then which
has to be hidden, and has to be atoned for.
Atonement is rest, the one-day sacrifice. Therefore at the

atonement as their rest. He who knows this rests firm,
and they also for whom a Hotri priest who knows
this, recites this hymn.
1, 5-3:11. The hymn vaisvanaraya dhishanam ritavridhe
(Rv. III, 2) forms the beginning of the
Agnimaruta. Dhishana, thought, is verily the end, this day
also is the end. Thus it is fit for the day.
1, 5-3:12. The hymn prayagyavo maruto
bhragadrishtayah (Rv. V, 55), addressed to the Maruts, is
one in
which many verses have the same ending. Verily, this
day also is one in which many receive the same
reward. Thus it is fit for the day.
1, 5-3:13. He recites the verse gatavedase sunavama
somam (Rv. I, 99, 1), addressed to Gatavedas, before
the (next following) hymn. That verse addressed to
Gatavedas is verily welfare, and leads to welfare.
Thus (by reciting it) he fares well.
1, 5-3:14. The hymn imam stomam arhate gatavedase
(Rv. I, 94), addressed to Gatavedas, is one in
which many verses have the same ending. Verily, this
day also (the mahavrata) is one in which many
receive the same reward. Thus it is fit for the day, yea, it
is fit for the day.


Part 2
Second Aranyaka
~ Chapter 1 ~
First Adhyaya
Section 1 
First Khanda
2, 1-1:1. This is the path: this sacrifice, and this
Brahman. This is the true. 
2, 1-1:2. Let no man swerve from it, let no man
transgress it.
2, 1-1:3. For the old (sages) did not transgress it, and
those who did transgress, became lost.
2, 1-1:4. This has been declared by a Rishi (Rv. VIII,
101, 14): `Three (classes of) people transgressed,
others settled down round about the venerable (Agni,
fire); the great (sun) stood in the midst of the
worlds, the blowing (Vayu, air) entered the Harits (the
dawns, or the ends of the earth).'
2, 1-1:5. When he says: `Three (classes of) people
transgressed,' the three (classes of) people who
transgressed are what we see here (on earth, born again)
as birds, trees, herbs, and serpents.
2, 1-1:6. When he says: `Others settled down round
about the venerable,' he means those who now sit
down to worship Agni (fire).
2, 1-1:7. When he says: `The great stood in the midst of
the worlds,' the great one in the midst of the
world is meant for this Aditya, the sun.
2, 1-1:8. When he says: `The blowing entered the Harits,'
he means that Vayu, the air, the purifier,
entered all the corners of the earth.
Section 2
Second Khanda
2, 1-2:1. People say: `Uktha, uktha,' hymns, hymns!
(without knowing what uktha, hymn, means.) The
hymn is truly (to be considered as) the earth, for from it all
whatsoever exists arises.
2, 1-2:2. The object of its praise is Agni (fire), and the
eighty verses (of the hymn) are food, for by means
of food one obtains everything.
2, 1-2:3. The hymn is truly the sky, for the birds fly along
the sky, and men drive following the sky. The 
object of its praise is Vayu (air), and the eighty verses (of
the hymn) are food, for by means of food one
obtains everything.
2, 1-2:4. The hymn is truly the heaven, for from its gift
(rain) all whatsoever exists arises. The object of
its praise is Aditya (the sun), and the eighty verses are
food, for by means of food one obtains everything.
2, 1-2:5. So much with reference to the gods
(mythological); now with reference to man (physiological).
2, 1-2:6. The hymn is truly man. He is great, he is
Pragapati. Let him think, I am the hymn.
2, 1-2:7. The hymn is his mouth, as before in the case of
the earth.
2, 1-2:8. The object of its praise is speech, and the eighty
verses (of the hymn) are food, for by means of
food he obtains everything.
2, 1-2:9. The hymn is the nostrils, as before in the case
of the sky.
2, 1-2:10. The object of its praise is breath, and the
eighty verses (of the hymn) are food, for by means of
food he obtains everything.
2, 1-2:11. The slight bent (at the root) of the nose is, as it
were, the place of the brilliant (Aditya, the
sun).
2, 1-2:12. The hymn is the forehead, as before in the
case of heaven. The object of its praise is the eye,
and the eighty verses (of the hymn) are food, for by
means of food he obtains everything.
2, 1-2:13. The eighty verses (of the hymn) are alike food
with reference to the gods as well as with
reference to man. For all these beings breathe and live
by means of food indeed. By food (given in alms,
&c.) he conquers this world, by food (given in sacrifice) he
conquers the other. Therefore the eighty
verses (of the hymn) are alike food, with reference to the
gods as well as with reference to man. 
2, 1-2:14. All this that is food, and all this that consumes
food, is only the earth, for from the earth arises
all whatever there is.
2, 1-2:15. And all that goes hence (dies on earth),
heaven consumes it all; and all that goes thence
(returns from heaven to a new life) the earth consumes it
all.
2, 1-2:16. That earth is thus both food and consumer.
He also (the true worshipper who meditates on himself as
being the uktha) is both consumer and
consumed (subject and object). No one possesses that
which he does not eat, or the things which do not
eat him.
Section 3
Third Khanda
2, 1-3:1. Next follows the origin of seed. The seed of
Pragapati are the Devas (gods). The seed of the
Devas is rain. The seed of rain are herbs. The seed of
herbs is food. The seed of food is seed. The seed
of seed are creatures. The seed of creatures is the heart.
The seed of the heart is the mind. The seed of
the mind is speech (Veda). The seed of speech is action
(sacrifice). The action done (in a former state) is
this man, the abode of Brahman.
2, 1-3:2. He (man) consists of food (ira), and because he
consists of food (iramaya), he consists of gold
(hiranmaya). He who knows this becomes golden in the
other world, and is seen as golden (as the sun) for
the benefit of all beings.
Section 4
Fourth Khanda
2, 1-4:1. Brahman (in the shape of prana, breath)
entered into that man by the tips of his feet, and
because Brahman entered (prapadyata) into that man by
the tips of his feet, therefore people call them the 
tips of the feet (prapada), but hoofs and claws in other
animals.
2, 1-4:2. Then Brahman crept up higher, and therefore
they were (called) the thighs (uru).
2, 1-4:3. Then he said: `Grasp wide,' and that was
(called) the belly (udara).
2, 1-4:4. Then he said: `Make room for me,' and that was
(called) the chest (uras).
2, 1-4:5. The Sarkarakshyas meditate on the belly as
Brahman, the Arunis on the heart. Both (these
places) are Brahman indeed.
2, 1-4:6. But Brahman crept upwards and came to the
head, and because he came to the head, therefore
the head is called head.
2, 1-4:7. Then these delights alighted in the head, sight,
hearing, mind, speech, breath.
2, 1-4:8. Delights alight on him who thus knows, why the
head is called head.
2, 1-4:9. These (five delights or senses) strove together,
saying: `I am the uktha (hymn), I am the uktha.'
`Well,' they said, `let us all go out from this body; then on
whose departure this body shall fall, he shall be
the uktha among us.'
2, 1-4:10. Speech went out, yet the body without
speaking remained, eating and drinking.
Sight went out, yet the body without seeing remained,
eating and drinking.
Hearing went out, yet the body without hearing remained,
eating and drinking.
Mind went out, yet the body, as if blinking, remained,
eating and drinking.
Breath went out, then when breath was gone out, the
body fell. 
2, 1-4:11. It was decayed, and because people said, it
decayed, therefore it was (called) body (sarira).
That is the reason of its name.
2, 1-4:12. If a man knows this, then the evil enemy who
hates him decays, or the evil enemy who hates
him is defeated.
2, 1-4:13. They strove again, saying: `I am the uktha, I
am the uktha.' `Well,' they said, `let us enter that
body again; then on whose entrance this body shall rise
again, he shall be the uktha among us.'
2, 1-4:14. Speech entered, but the body lay still. Sight
entered, but the body lay still. Hearing entered,
but the body lay still. Mind entered, but the body lay still.
Breath entered, and when breath had entered,
the body rose, and it became the uktha.
2, 1-4:15. Therefore breath alone is the uktha.
2, 1-4:16. Let people know that breath is the uktha
indeed.
2, 1-4:17. The Devas (the other senses) said to breath:
`Thou art the uktha, thou art all this, we are thine,
thou art ours.'
2, 1-4:18. This has also been said by a Rishi (Rv. VIII,
92, 32): `Thou art ours, we are thine.'
Section 5
Fifth Khanda
2, 1-5:1. Then the Devas carried him (the breath) forth,
and being carried forth, he was stretched out, and
when people said, `He was stretched out,' then it was in
the morning; when they said, `He is gone to rest,'
then it was in the evening. Day, therefore, is the
breathing up, night the breathing down.
2, 1-5:2. Speech is Agni, sight that Aditya (sun), mind the
moon, hearing the Dis (quarters): this is the 
prahitam samyoga, the union of the deities as sent forth.
These deities (Agni, &c.) are thus in the body,
but their (phenomenal) appearance yonder is among the
deities this was intended.
2, 1-5:3. And Hiranyadat Vaida also, who knew this (and
who by his knowledge had become
Hiranyagarbha or the universal spirit), said: `Whatever
they do not give to me, they do not possess
themselves.' I know the prahitam samyoga, the union of
the deities, as entered into the body. This is it.
2, 1-5:4. To him who knows this all creatures, without
being constrained, offer gifts.
2, 1-5:5. That breath is (to be called) sattya (the true), for
sat is breath, ti is food, yam is the sun. This is
threefold, and threefold the eye also may be called, it
being white, dark, and the pupil. He who knows
why true is true (why sattya is sattya), even if he should
speak falsely, yet what he says is true.
Section 6
Sixth Khanda
2, 1-6:1. Speech is his (the breath's) rope, the names the
knots. Thus by his speech as by a rope, and by
his names as by knots, all this is bound. For all this are
names indeed, and with speech he calls
everything.
2, 1-6:2. People carry him who knows this, as if they
were bound by a rope.
2, 1-6:3. Of the body of the breath thus meditated on, the
Ushnih verse forms the hairs, the Gayatri the
skin, the Trishtubh the flesh, the Anushtubh the muscles,
the Gagati the bone, the Pankti the marrow, the
Brihati the breath (prana). He is covered with the verses
(khandas, metres). Because he is thus covered
with verses, therefore they call them khandas (coverings,
metres).
2, 1-6:4. If a man knows the reason why khandas are
called khandas, the verses cover him in whatever 
place he likes against any evil deed.
2, 1-6:5. This is said by a Rishi (Rv. I, 164, 13):
2, 1-6:6. `I saw (the breath) as a guardian, never tiring,
coming and going on his ways (the arteries).
That breath (in the body, being identified with the sun
among the Devas), illuminating the principal and
intermediate quarters of the sky, is returning constantly in
the midst of the worlds.'
He says: `I saw a guardian,' because he, the breath, is a
guardian, for he guards everything.
2, 1-6:7. He says: `Never tiring,' because the breath
never rests.
2, 1-6:8. He says: `Coming and going on his ways,'
because the breath comes and goes on his ways.
2, 1-6:9. He says: `Illuminating the principal and
intermediate,' because he illuminates these only, the
principal and intermediate quarters of the sky.
2, 1-6:10. He says: `He is returning constantly in the
midst of the worlds,' because he returns indeed
constantly in the midst of the worlds.
2, 1-6:11. And then, there is another verse (Rv. I, 55, 81):
`They are covered like caves by those who
make them,'
2, 1-6:12. For all this is covered indeed by breath.
2, 1-6:13. This ether is supported by breath as Brihati,
and as this ether is supported by breath as Brihati,
so one should know that all things, not excepting ants,
are supported by breath as Brihati.
Section 7
Seventh Khanda
2, 1-7:1. Next follow the powers of that Person.
2, 1-7:2. By his speech earth and fire were created.
Herbs are produced on the earth, and Agni (fire)
makes them ripe and sweet. `Take this, take this,' thus
saying do earth and fire serve their parent, speech.
2, 1-7:3. As far as the earth reaches, as far as fire
reaches, so far does his world extend, and as long as the
world of the earth and fire does not decay, so long does
his world not decay who thus knows this power of
speech.
2, 1-7:4. By breath (in the nose) the sky and the air were
created. People follow the sky, and hear along
the sky, while the air carries along pure scent. Thus do
sky and air serve their parent, the breath.
As far as the sky reaches, as far as the air reaches, so far
does his world extend, and as long as the world
of the sky and the air does not decay, so long does his
world not decay who thus knows this power of
breath.
2, 1-7:5. By his eye heaven and the sun were created.
Heaven gives him rain and food, while the sun
causes his light to shine. Thus do the heaven and the
sun serve their parent, the eye.
As far as heaven reaches and as far as the sun reaches,
so far does his world extend, and as long as the
world of heaven and the sun does not decay, so long
does his world not decay who thus knows the power
of the eye.
2, 1-7:6. By his ear the quarters and the moon were
created. From all the quarters they come to him, and
from all the quarters he hears, while the moon produces
for him the bright and the dark halves for the
sake of sacrificial work. Thus do the quarters and the
moon serve their parent, the ear.
As far as the quarters reach and as far as the moon
reaches, so far does his world extend, and as long as
the world of the quarters and the moon does not decay,
so long does his world not decay who thus knows
the power of the ear. 
2, 1-7:7. By his mind the water and Varuna were created.
Water yields to him faith (being used for
sacred acts), Varuna keeps his offspring within the law.
Thus do water and Varuna serve their parent, the
mind.
As far as water reaches and as far as Varuna reaches, so
far does his world extend, and as long as the
world of water and Varuna does not decay, so long does
his world not decay who thus knows the power of
the mind.
Section 8
Eighth Khanda
2, 1-8:1. Was it water really? Was it water? Yes, all this
was water indeed. This (water) was the root
(cause), that (the world) was the shoot (effect). He (the
person) is the father, they (earth, fire, &c.) are the
sons. Whatever there is belonging to the son, belongs to
the father; whatever there is belonging to the
father, belongs to the son. This was intended.
2, 1-8:2. Mahidasa Aitareya, who knew this, said: `I know
myself (reaching) as far as the gods, and I
know the gods (reaching) as far as me. For these gods
receive their gifts from hence, and are supported
from hence.'
2, 1-8:3. This is the mountain, viz. eye, ear, mind,
speech, and breath. They call it the mountain of
Brahman.
2, 1-8:4. He who knows this, throws down the evil enemy
who hates him; the evil enemy who hates him
is defeated.
2, 1-8:5. He (the Prana, identified with Brahman) is the
life, the breath; he is being (while the givatman
remains), and not-being (when the givatman departs).
2, 1-8:6. The Devas (speech, &c.) worshipped him
(prana) as Bhuti or being, and thus they became great
beings. And therefore even now a man who sleeps,
breathes like bhurbhuh. 
2, 1-8:7. The Asuras worshipped him as Abhuti or notbeing, and thus they were defeated.
2, 1-8:8. He who knows this, becomes great by himself,
while the evil enemy who hates him, is defeated.
2, 1-8:9. He (the breath) is death (when he departs), and
immortality (while he abides).
2, 1-8:10. And this has been said by a Rishi (Rv. I, 164,
38):
2, 1-8:11. `Downwards and upwards he (the wind of the
breath) goes, held by food;' for this upbreathing, being held back by the down-breathing, does
not move forward (and leave the body altogether).
2, 1-8:12. `The immortal dwells with the mortal;'- for
through him (the breath) all this dwells together,
the bodies being clearly mortal, but this being (the
breath), being immortal.
2, 1-8:13. `These two (body and breath) go for ever in
different directions (the breath moving the senses
of the body, the body supporting the senses of the breath:
the former going upwards to another world, the
body dying and remaining on earth). They increase the
one (the body), but they do not increase the other,'
i.e. they increase these bodies (by food), but this being
(breath) is immortal.
2, 1-8:14. He who knows this becomes immortal in that
world (having become united with
Hiranyagarbha), and is seen as immortal (in the sun) by
all beings, yea, by all beings.

Second Adhyaya
Section 1
First Khanda
2, 2-1:1. He (the sun), who shines, honoured this world
(the body of the worshipper, by entering into it),
in the form of man (the worshipper who meditates on
breath). For he who shines (the sun) is (the same
as) the breath. He honoured this (body of the
worshipper) during a hundred years, therefore there are a
hundred years in the life of a man. Because he honoured
him during a hundred years, therefore there are
(the poets of the first Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) the
Satarkin, (having honour for a hundred years.)
Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath),
the Satarkin poets.
2, 2-1:2. He (breath) placed himself in the midst of all
whatsoever exists. Because he placed himself in
the midst of all whatsoever exists, therefore there are (the
poets of the second to the ninth Mandala of the
Rig-veda, called) the Madhyamas. Therefore people call
him who is really Prana (breath), the Madhyama
poets.
2, 2-1:3. He as up-breathing is the swallower (gritsa), as
down-breathing he is delight (mada). Because
as up-breathing he is swallower (gritsa) and as downbreathing delight (mada), therefore there is (the poet
of the second Mandala of the Rig-veda, called)
Gritsamada. Therefore people call him who is really
Prana
(breath), Gritsamada.
2, 2-1:4. Of him (breath) all this whatsoever was a friend.
Because of him all (visvam) this whatsoever
was a friend (mitram), therefore there is (the poet of the
third Mandala of the Rig-veda, called)
Visvamitra. Therefore people call him who is really Prana
(breath), Visvamitra.
2, 2-1:5. The Devas (speech, &c.) said to him (the
breath): `He is to be loved by all of us.' Because the
Devas said of him, that he was to be loved (vama) by all
of them, therefore there is (the poet of the fourth
Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) Vamadeva. Therefore
people call him who is really Prana (breath),
Vamadeva.
2, 2-1:6. He (breath) guarded all this whatsoever from
evil. Because he guarded (atrayata) all this
whatsoever from evil, therefore there are (the poets of the
fifth Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) Atrayah.
Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath),
Atrayah.
Section 2
Second Khanda
2, 2-2:1. He (breath) is likewise a Bibhradvaga (bringer of
offspring). Offspring is vaga, and he (breath)
supports offspring. Because he supports it, therefore
there is (the poet of the sixth Mandala of the Rigveda, called) Bharadvaga. Therefore people call him who
is really Prana (breath), Bharadvaga.
2, 2-2:2. The Devas (speech, &c.) said to him: `He it is
who chiefly causes us to dwell on earth.' Because
the Devas said of him, that he chiefly caused them to
dwell on earth, therefore there is (the poet of the
seventh Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) Vasishtha.
Therefore people call him who is really Prana
(breath), Vasishtha.
2, 2-2:3. He (breath) went forth towards all this
whatsoever. Because he went forth toward all this
whatsoever, therefore there are (the poets of the eighth
Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) the Pragathas.
Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath),
the Pragathas.
2, 2-2:4. He (breath) purified all this whatsoever.
Because he purified all this whatsoever, therefore there
are (the hymns and also the poets of the ninth Mandala of
the Rig-veda, called) the Pavamanis. Therefore
people called him who is really Prana (breath), the
Pavamanis.
2, 2-2:5. He (breath) said: `Let me be everything
whatsoever, small (kshudra) and great (mahat), and this
became the Kshudrasuktas and Mahasuktas.' Therefore
there were (the hymns and also the poets of the
tenth Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) the Kshudrasuktas
(and Mahasuktas). Therefore people call him 
who is really Prana (breath), the Kshudrasuktas (and
Mahasuktas).
2, 2-2:6. He (breath) said once: `You have said what is
well said (su-ukta) indeed. This became a Sukta
(hymn).' Therefore there was the Sukta. Therefore
people call him who is really Prana (breath), Sukta.
2, 2-2:7. He (breath) is a Rik (verse), for he did honour to
all beings (by entering into them). Because he
did honour to all beings, therefore there was the Rik
verse. Therefore people call him who is really Prana
(breath), Rik.
2, 2-2:8. He (breath) is an Ardharka (half-verse), for he
did honour to all places (ardha). Because he did
honour to all places, therefore there was the Ardharka.
Therefore people call him who is really Prana
(breath), Ardharka.
2, 2-2:9. He (breath) is a Pada (word), for he got into all
these beings. Because he got (padi) into all these
beings, therefore there was the Pada (word). Therefore
people call him who is really Prana (breath), Pada.
2, 2-2:10. He (breath) is an Akshara (syllable), for he
pours out (ksharati) gifts to all these beings, and
without him no one can pour out (atiksharati) gifts.
Therefore there was the Akshara (syllable).
Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath),
Akshara.
2, 2-2:11. Thus all these Rik verses, all Vedas, all
sounds are one word, viz. Prana (breath). Let him
know that Prana is all Rik verses.
Section 3
Third Khanda
2, 2-3:1. While Visvamitra was going to repeat the hymns
of this day (the mahavrata), Indra sat down
near him. Visvamitra (guessing that Indra wanted food)
said to him, `This (the verses of the hymn) is
food,' and repeated the thousand Brihati verses. By
means of this he went to the delightful home of Indra 
(Svarga).
2, 2-3:2. Indra said to him: `Rishi, thou hast come to my
delightful home. Rishi, repeat a second hymn.'
Visvamitra (guessing that Indra wanted food) said to him,
`This (the verses of the hymn) is food,' and
repeated the thousand Brihati verses. By means of this
he went to the delightful home of Indra (Svarga).
2, 2-3:3. Indra said to him: `Rishi, thou hast come to my
delightful home. Rishi, repeat a third hymn.'
Visvamitra (guessing that Indra wanted food) said to him,
`This (the verses of the hymn) is food,' and
repeated the thousand Brihati verses. By means of this
he went to the delightful home of Indra (Svarga).
2, 2-3:4. Indra said to him: `Rishi, thou hast come to my
delightful home. I grant thee a boon.'
Visvamitra said: `May I know thee.' Indra said: `I am
Prana (breath), O Rishi, thou art Prana, all things
are Prana. For it is Prana who shines as the sun, and I
here pervade all regions under that form. This
food of mine (the hymn) is my friend and my support
(dakshina). This is the food prepared by
Visvamitra. I am verily he who shines (the sun).'
Section 4
Fourth Khanda
2, 2-4:1. This then becomes perfect as a thousand of
Brihati verses. Its consonants form its body, its
voice (vowels) the soul, its sibilants the air of the breath.
2, 2-4:2. He who knew this became Vasishtha, he took
this name from thence.
2, 2-4:3. Indra verily declared this to Visvamitra, and
Indra verily declared this to Bharadvaga.
Therefore Indra is invoked by him as a friend.
2, 2-4:4. This becomes perfect as a thousand of Brihati
verses, and of that hymn perfect with a thousand
Brihati verses, there are 36,000 syllables. So many are
also the thousands of days of a hundred years 
(36,000). With the consonants they fill the nights, with the
vowels the days.
2, 2-4:5. This becomes perfect as a thousand of Brihati
verses. He who knows this, after this thousand of
Brihatis thus accomplished, becomes full of knowledge,
full of the gods, full of Brahman, full of the
immortal, and then goes also to the gods.
2, 2-4:6. What I am (the worshipper), that is he (sun);
what he is, that am I.
2, 2-4:7. This has been said by a Rishi (Rv. I, 115, 1):
`The sun is the self of all that moves and rests.'
2, 2-4:8. Let him look to that, let him look to that!

~ Chapter 3 ~
Third Adhyaya
Section 1
First Khanda
2, 3-1:1. He who knows himself as the fivefold hymn
(uktha), the emblem of Prana (breath), from whence
all this springs, he is clever. These five are the earth, air,
ether, water, and fire (gyotis). This is the self,
the fivefold uktha. For from him all this springs, and into
him it enters again (at the dissolution of the
world). He who knows this, becomes the refuge of his
friends.
2, 3-1:2. And to him who knows the food (object) and the
feeder (subject) in that uktha, a strong son is
born, and food is never wanting. Water and earth are
food, for all food consists of these two. Fire and air
are the feeder, for by means of them man eats all food.
Ether is the bowl, for all this is poured into the
ether. He who knows this, becomes the bowl or support
of his friends.
2, 3-1:3. To him who knows the food and the feeder in
that uktha, a strong son is born, and food is never
wanting. Herbs and trees are food, animals the feeder,
for animals eat herbs and trees.
2, 3-1:4. Of them again those who have teeth above and
below, shaped after the likeness of man, are
feeders, the other animals are food. Therefore these
overcome the other animals, for the eater is over the
food.
2, 3-1:5. He who knows this is over his friends.
Section 2
Second Khanda
2, 3-2:1. He who knows the gradual development of the
self in him (the man conceived as the uktha),
obtains himself more development.
2, 3-2:2. There are herbs and trees and all that is
animated, and he knows the self gradually developing in
them. For in herbs and trees sap only is seen, but
thought (kitta) in animated beings.
2, 3-2:3. Among animated beings again the self develops
gradually, for in some sap (blood) is seen (as
well as thought), but in others thought is not seen.
2, 3-2:4. And in man again the self develops gradually,
for he is most endowed with knowledge. He says
what he has known, he sees what he has known. He
knows what is to happen to-morrow, he knows
heaven and hell. By means of the mortal he desires the
immortal thus is he endowed.
2, 3-2:5. With regard to the other animals hunger and
thirst only are a kind of understanding. But they
do not say what they have known, nor do they see what
they have known. They do not know what is to
happen to-morrow, nor heaven and hell. They go so far
and no further, for they are born according to
their knowledge (in a former life).
Section 3 
Third Khanda
2, 3-3:1. That man (conceived as uktha) is the sea, rising
beyond the whole world. Whatever he reaches,
he wishes to go beyond. If he reaches the sky, he wishes
to go beyond.
2, 3-3:2. If he should reach that (heavenly) world, he
would wish to go beyond.
2, 3-3:3. That man is fivefold. The heat in him is fire; the
apertures (of the senses) are ether; blood,
mucus, and seed are water; the body is earth; breath is
air.
2, 3-3:4. That air is fivefold, viz. up-breathing, downbreathing, back-breathing, out-breathing, onbreathing. The other powers (devatas), viz. sight,
hearing, mind, and speech, are comprised under upbreathing and down-breathing. For when breath departs,
they also depart with it.
2, 3-3:5. That man (conceived as uktha) is the sacrifice,
which is a succession now of speech and now of
thought. That sacrifice is fivefold, viz. the Agnihotra, the
new and full moon sacrifices, the four-monthly
sacrifices, the animal sacrifice, the Soma sacrifice. The
Soma sacrifice is the most perfect of sacrifices,
for in it these five kinds of ceremonies are seen: the first
which precedes the libations (the Diksha, &c.),
then three libations, and what follows (the Avabhritha,
&c.) is the fifth.
Section 4
Fourth Khanda
2, 3-4:1. He who knows one sacrifice above another, one
day above another, one deity above the others,
he is clever. Now this great uktha (the nishkevalyasastra) is the sacrifice above another, the day above
another, the deity above others.
2, 3-4:2. This uktha is fivefold. With regard to its being
performed as a Stoma (chorus), it is Trivrit, 
Pankadasa, Saptadasa, Ekavimsa, and Pankavimsa.
With regard to its being performed as a Saman
(song), it is Gayatra, Rathantara, Brihat, Bhadra, and
Ragana. With regard to metre, it is Gayatri,
Ushnih, Brihati, Trishtubh, and Dvipada. And the
explanation (given before in the Aranyaka) is that it is
the head, the right wing, the left wing, the tail, and the
body of the bird.
2, 3-4:3. He performs the Prastava in five ways, he
performs the Udgitha in five ways, he performs the
Pratihara in five ways, he performs the Upadrava in five
ways, he performs the Nidhana in five ways. All
this together forms one thousand Stobhas, or musical
syllables.
2, 3-4:4. Thus also are the Rik verses, contained in the
Nishkevalya, recited (by the Hotri) in five orders.
What precedes the eighty trikas, that is one order, then
follow the three sets of eighty trikas each, and
what comes after is the fifth order.
2, 3-4:5. This (the hymns of this Sastra) as a whole (if
properly counted with the Stobha syllables) comes
to one thousand (of Brihati verses). That (thousand) is
the whole, and ten, ten is called the whole. For
number is such (measured by ten). Ten tens are a
hundred, ten hundreds are a thousand, and that is the
whole. These are the three metres (the tens, pervading
everything). And this food also (the three sets of
hymns being represented as food) is threefold, eating,
drinking, and chewing. He obtains that food by
those (three numbers, ten, hundred, and thousand, or by
the three sets of eighty trikas).
Section 5
Fifth Khanda
2, 3-5:1. This (nishkevalya-sastra) becomes perfect as a
thousand of Brihati verses.
2, 3-5:2. Some teachers (belonging to a different Sakha)
recognise a thousand of different metres (not of
Brihatis only). They say: `Is another thousand (a
thousand of other verses) good? Let us say it is good.' 
2, 3-5:3. Some say, a thousand of Trishtubh verses,
others a thousand of Gagati verses, others a thousand
of Anushtubh verses.
2, 3-5:4. This has been said by a Rishi (Rv. X, 124, 9):
2, 3-5:5. `Poets through their understanding discovered
Indra dancing an Anushtubh.' This is meant to
say: They discovered (and meditated) in speech (called
Anushtubh) at that time (when they worshipped
the uktha)- the Prana (breath) connected with Indra.
2, 3-5:6. He (who takes the recited verses as
Anushtubhs) is able to become celebrated and of good
report.
2, 3-5:7. No! he says; rather is such a man liable to die
before his time. For that self (consisting of
Anushtubhs) is incomplete. For if a man confines himself
to speech, not to breath, then driven by his
mind, he does not succeed with speech.
2, 3-5:8. Let him work towards the Brihati, for the Brihati
(breath) is the complete self.
2, 3-5:9. That self (givatman) is surrounded on all sides
by members. And as that self is on all sides
surrounded by members, the Brihati also is on all sides
surrounded by metres.
2, 3-5:10. For the self (in the heart) is the middle of these
members, and the Brihati is the middle of the
metres.
2, 3-5:11. `He is able to become celebrated and of good
report, but (the other) able to die before his time,'
thus he said. For the Brihati is the complete self,
therefore let him work towards the Brihati (let him
reckon the sastra recitation as a thousand Brihatis).
Section 6
Sixth Khanda
2, 3-6:1. This (nishkevalya-sastra) becomes perfect as a
thousand of Brihati verses. In this thousand of
Brihatis there are one thousand one hundred and twentyfive Anushtubhs. For the smaller is contained in
the larger.
2, 3-6:2. This has been said by a Rishi (Rv. VIII, 76, 12):
2, 3-6:3. `A speech of eight feet;' because there are
eight feet of four syllables each in the Anushtubh.
2, 3-6:4. `Of nine corners;' because the Brihati becomes
nine-cornered (having nine feet of four
syllables each).
2, 3-6:5. `Touching the truth;' because speech
(Anushtubh) is truth, touched by the verse (Brihati).
2, 3-6:6. `He (the Hotri) makes the body out of Indra;'
for out of this thousand of Brihati verses turned
into Anushtubhs, and therefore out of Prana as connected
with Indra, and out of the Brihati (which is
Prana), he makes speech, that is Anushtubh, as a body.
2, 3-6:7. This Mahaduktha is the highest development of
speech, and it is fivefold, viz. measured, not
measured, music, true, and untrue.
2, 3-6:8. A Rik verse, a gatha, a kumbya are measured
(metrical). A Yagus line, an invocation, and
general remarks, these are not measured (they are in
prose). A Saman, or any portion (parvan) of it, is
music. Om is true, Na is untrue.
2, 3-6:9. What is true (Om) is the flower and fruit of
speech. He is able to become celebrated and of good
report, for he speaks the true (Om), the flower and fruit of
speech.
2, 3-6:10. Now the untrue is the root of speech, and as a
tree whose root is exposed dries up and perishes,
thus a man who says what is untrue exposes his root,
dries up and perishes. Therefore one should not say
what is untrue, but guard oneself from it.
2, 3-6:11. That syllable Om (yes) goes forward (to the
first cause of the world) and is empty. Therefore if
a man says Om (yes) to everything, then that (which he
gives away) is wanting to him here. If he says
Om (yes) to everything, then he would empty himself, and
would not be capable of any enjoyments.
2, 3-6:12. That syllable Na (no) is full for oneself. If a
man says No to everything, then his reputation
would become evil, and that would ruin him even here.
2, 3-6:13. Therefore let a man give at the proper time
only, not at the wrong time. Thus he unites the
true and the untrue, and from the union of those two he
grows, and becomes greater and greater.
2, 3-6:14. He who knows this speech of which this (the
mahaduktha) is a development, he is clever. A is
the whole of speech, and manifested through different
kinds of contact (mutes) and of wind (sibilants), it
becomes manifold and different.
2, 3-6:15. Speech if uttered in a whisper is breath, if
spoken aloud, it is body. Therefore (if whispered) it
is almost hidden, for what is incorporeal is almost hidden,
and breath is incorporeal. But if spoken aloud,
it is body, and therefore it is perceptible, for body is
perceptible.
Section 7
Seventh Khanda
2, 3-7:1. This (nishkevalya-sastra) becomes perfect as a
thousand of Brihatis. It is glory (the glorious
Brahman, not the absolute Brahman), it is Indra. Indra is
the lord of all beings. He who thus knows
Indra as the lord of all beings, departs from this world by
loosening the bonds of life so said Mahidasa
Aitareya. Having departed he becomes Indra (or
Hiranyagarbha) and shines in those worlds.
2, 3-7:2. And with regard to this they say: `If a man
obtains the other world in this form (by meditating
on the prana, breath, which is the uktha, the hymn of the
mahavrata), then in what form does he obtain 
this world?'
2, 3-7:3. Here the blood of the woman is a form of Agni
(fire); therefore no one should despise it. And
the seed of the man is a form of Aditya (sun); therefore no
one should despise it. This self (the woman)
gives her self (skin, blood, and flesh) to that self (fat,
bone, and marrow), and that self (man) gives his self
(fat, bone, and marrow) to this self (skin, blood, and
flesh). Thus these two grow together. In this form
(belonging to the woman and to fire) he goes to that world
(belonging to the man and the sun), and in that
form (belonging to man and the sun) he goes to this world
(belonging to the woman and to fire).
Section 8
Eighth Khanda
2, 3-8:1. Here (with regard to obtaining Hiranyagarbha)
there are these Slokas:
2, 3-8:2. The fivefold body into which the indestructible
(prana, breath) enters, that body which the
harnessed horses (the senses) draw about, that body
where the true of the true (the highest Brahman)
follows after, in that body (of the worshipper) all gods
become one.
2, 3-8:3. That body into which goes the indestructible
(the breath) which we have joined (in meditation),
proceeding from the indestructible (the highest Brahman),
that body which the harnessed horses (the
senses) draw about, that body where the true of the true
follows after, in that body all gods become one.
2, 3-8:4. After separating themselves from the Yes and
No of language, and of all that is hard and cruel,
poets have discovered (what they sought for); dependent
on names they rejoiced in what had been
revealed.
2, 3-8:5. That in which the poets rejoiced (the revealed
nature of prana, breath), in it the gods exist all
joined together. Having driven away evil by means of that
Brahman (which is hidden in prana), the 
enlightened man goes to the Svarga world (becomes one
with Hiranyagarbha, the universal spirit).
2, 3-8:6. No one wishing to describe him (prana, breath)
by speech, describes him by calling him
`woman,' `neither woman nor man,' or `man' (all such
names applying only to the material body, and not
to prana or breath).
2, 3-8:7. Brahman (as hidden beneath prana) is called
the A; and the I (ego) is gone there (the
worshipper should know that he is uktha and prana).
2, 3-8:8. This becomes perfect as a thousand of Brihati
verses, and of that hymn, perfect with a thousand
Brihati verses, there are 36,000 syllables. So many are
also the thousands of days of human life. By
means of the syllable of life (the a) alone (which is
contained in that thousand of hymns) does a man
obtain the day of life (the mahavrata day, which
completes the number of the days in the Gavamayana
sacrifice), and by means of the day of life (he obtains) the
syllable of life.
2, 3-8:9. Now there is a chariot of the god (prana)
destroying all desires (for the worlds of Indra, the
moon, the earth, all of which lie below the place of
Hiranyagarbha). Its front part (the point of the two
shafts of the carriage where the yoke is fastened) is
speech, its wheels the ears, the horses the eyes, the
driver the mind. Prana (breath) mounts that chariot (and
on it, i.e. by means of meditating on Prana, he
reaches Hiranyagarbha).
2, 3-8:10. This has been said by a Rishi (Rv. X, 39, 12):
2, 3-8:11. `Come hither on that which is quicker than
mind,' and (Rv. VIII, 73, 2) `Come hither on that
which is quicker than the twinkling of an eye,' yea, the
twinkling of an eye.

~ Chapter 4 ~
Fourth Adhyaya 
Section 1
First Khanda
2, 4-1:1. Verily, in the beginning all this was Self, one
only; there was nothing else blinking whatsoever.
2, 4-1:2. He thought: `Shall I send forth worlds?' (1) He
sent forth these worlds,
2, 4-1:3. Ambhas (water), Mariki (light), Mara (mortal),
and Ap (water).
2, 4-1:4. That Ambhas (water) is above the heaven, and
it is heaven, the support. The Marikis (the
lights) are the sky. The Mara (mortal) is the earth, and
the waters under the earth are the Ap world. (2)
2, 4-1:5. He thought: `There are these worlds; shall I
send forth guardians of the worlds?'
He then formed the Purusha (the person), taking him forth
from the water. (3)
2, 4-1:6. He brooded on him, and when that person had
thus been brooded on, a mouth burst forth like an
egg. From the mouth proceeded speech, from speech
Agni (fire).
Nostrils burst forth. From the nostrils proceeded scent
(prana), from scent Vayu (air). 
Eyes burst forth. From the eyes proceeded sight, from
sight Aditya (sun).
Ears burst forth. From the ears proceeded hearing, from
hearing the Dis (quarters of the world).
Skin burst forth. From the skin proceeded hairs (sense of
touch), from the hairs shrubs and trees.
The heart burst forth. From the heart proceeded mind,
from mind Kandramas (moon).
The navel burst forth. From the navel proceeded the
Apana (the down-breathing), from Apana death.
The generative organ burst forth. From the organ
proceeded seed, from seed water. (4)
Section 2
Second Khanda
2, 4-2:1. Those deities (devata), Agni and the rest, after
they had been sent forth, fell into this great
ocean.
2, 4-2:Then he (the Self) besieged him, (the person) with
hunger and thirst.
2, 4-2:2. The deities then (tormented by hunger and
thirst) spoke to him (the Self): `Allow us a place in
which we may rest and eat food.' (1)
He led a cow towards them (the deities). They said: `This
is not enough.' He led a horse towards them.
They said: `This is not enough.' (2)
He led man towards them. Then they said: `Well done,
indeed.' Therefore man is well done.
2, 4-2:3. He said to them: `Enter, each according to his
place.' (3)
2, 4-2:4. Then Agni (fire), having become speech,
entered the mouth. Vayu (air), having become scent, 
entered the nostrils. Aditya (sun), having become sight,
entered the eyes. The Dis (regions), having
become hearing, entered the ears. The shrubs and trees,
having become hairs, entered the skin.
Kandramas (the moon), having become mind, entered the
heart. Death, having become down-breathing,
entered the navel. The waters, having become seed,
entered the generative organ. (4)
2, 4-2:5. Then Hunger and Thirst spoke to him (the Self):
`Allow us two (a place).' He said to them: `I
assign you to those very deities there, I make you copartners with them.' Therefore to whatever deity an
oblation is offered, hunger and thirst are co-partners in it.
(5)
Section 3
Third Khanda
2, 4-3:1. He thought: `There are these worlds and the
guardians of the worlds. Let me send forth food for
them.' (1)
He brooded over the water. From the water thus brooded
on, matter (murti) was born. And that matter
which was born, that verily was food. (2)
2, 4-3:2. When this food (the object matter) had thus
been sent forth, it wished to flee, crying and turning
away. He (the subject) tried to grasp it by speech. He
could not grasp it by speech. If he had grasped it by
speech, man would be satisfied by naming food. (3)
He tried to grasp it by scent (breath). He could not grasp
it by scent. If he had grasped it by scent, man
would be satisfied by smelling food. (4)
He tried to grasp it by the eye. He could not grasp it by
the eye. If he had grasped it by the eye, man would
be satisfied by seeing food. (5)
He tried to grasp it by the ear. He could not grasp it by
the ear. If he had grasped it by the ear, man would
be satisfied by hearing food. (6) 
He tried to grasp it by the skin. He could not grasp it by
the skin. If he had grasped it by the skin, man
would be satisfied by touching food. (7)
He tried to grasp it by the mind. He could not grasp it by
the mind. If he had grasped it by the mind, man
would be satisfied by thinking food. (8)
He tried to grasp it by the generative organ. He could not
grasp it by the organ. If he had grasped it by
the organ, man would be satisfied by sending forth food.
(9)
He tried to grasp it by the down-breathing (the breath
which helps to swallow food through the mouth and
to carry it off through the rectum, the payvindriya). He got
it.
2, 4-3:3. Thus it is Vayu (the getter) who lays hold of
food, and the Vayu is verily Annayu (he who gives
life or who lives by food). (10)
2, 4-3:4. He thought: `How can all this be without me?'
2, 4-3:5. And then he thought: `By what way shall I get
there?'
2, 4-3:6. And then he thought: `If speech names, if scent
smells, if the eye sees, if the ear hears, if the
skin feels, if the mind thinks, if the off-breathing digests, if
the organ sends forth, then what am I?' (11)
2, 4-3:7. Then opening the suture of the skull, he got in
by that door.
2, 4-3:8. That door is called the Vidriti (tearing asunder),
the Nandana (the place of bliss).
2, 4-3:9. There are three dwelling-places for him, three
dreams; this dwelling-place (the eye), this
dwelling-place (the throat), this dwelling-place (the heart).
(12)
2, 4-3:10. When born (when the Highest Self had entered
the body) he looked through all things, in order 
to see whether anything wished to proclaim here another
(Self). He saw this person only (himself) as the
widely spread Brahman. `I saw it,' thus he said; (13)
Therefore he was Idam-dra (seeing this).
2, 4-3:11. Being Idamdra by name, they call him Indra
mysteriously. For the Devas love mystery, yea,
they love mystery. (14)

~ Chapter 5 ~
Fifth Adhyaya
Section 1
First Khanda
2, 5-1:1. Let the women who are with child move away!
2, 5-1:2. Verily, from the beginning he (the self) is in man
as a germ, which is called seed.
2, 5-1:3. This (seed), which is strength gathered from all
the limbs of the body, he (the man) bears as self
in his self (body). When he commits the seed to the
woman, then he (the father) causes it to be born.
That is his first birth. (1)
2, 5-1:4. That seed becomes the self of the woman, as if
one of her own limbs. Therefore it does not
injure her.
2, 5-1:5. She nourishes his (her husband's) self (the son)
within her. (2) She who nourishes, is to be
nourished.
2, 5-1:6. The woman bears the germ. He (the father)
elevates the child even before the birth, and
immediately after.
2, 5-1:7. When he thus elevates the child both before
and after his birth, he really elevates his own self, 
2, 5-1:8. For the continuation of these worlds (men). For
thus are these worlds continued.
2, 5-1:9. This is his second birth. (3)
2, 5-1:10. He (the son), being his self, is then placed in
his stead for (the performance of) all good works.
2, 5-1:11. But his other self (the father), having done all
he has to do, and having reached the full
measure of his life, departs.
2, 5-1:12. And departing from hence he is born again.
That is his third birth.
2, 5-1:13. And this has been declared by a Rishi (Rv. IV,
27, 1): (4)
2, 5-1:14. `While dwelling in the womb, I discovered all
the births of these Devas. A hundred iron
strongholds kept me, but I escaped quickly down like a
falcon.'
2, 5-1:15. Vamadeva, lying in the womb, has thus
declared this. (5)
And having this knowledge he stepped forth, after this
dissolution of the body, and having obtained all his
desires in that heavenly world, became immortal, yea, he
became immortal. (6)

~ Chapter 6 ~
Sixth Adhyaya
Section 1
First Khanda
2, 6-1:1. Let the women go back to their place.
2, 6-1:2. Who is he whom we meditate on as the Self?
Which is the Self? 
2, 6-1:3. That by which we see (form), that by which we
hear (sound), that by which we perceive smells,
that by which we utter speech, that by which we
distinguish sweet and not sweet, (1) and what comes
from
the heart and the mind, namely, perception, command,
understanding, knowledge, wisdom, seeing,
holding, thinking, considering, readiness (or suffering),
remembering, conceiving, willing, breathing,
loving, desiring?
2, 6-1:4. No, all these are various names only of
knowledge (the true Self). (2)
2, 6-1:5. And that Self, consisting of (knowledge), is
Brahman (m.), it is Indra, it is Pragapati. All these
Devas, these five great elements, earth, air, ether, water,
fire, these and those which are, as it were, small
and mixed, and seeds of this kind and that kind, born
from eggs, born from the womb, born from heat,
born from germs, horses, cows, men, elephants, and
whatsoever breathes, whether walking or flying, and
what is immoveable all that is led (produced) by
knowledge (the Self).
2, 6-1:6. It rests on knowledge (the Self). The world is
led (produced) by knowledge (the Self).
Knowledge is its cause.
2, 6-1:7. Knowledge is Brahman. (3)
2, 6-1:8. He (Vamadeva), having by this conscious self
stepped forth from this world, and having
obtained all desires in that heavenly world, became
immortal, yea, he became immortal. Thus it is, Om.
(4)

~ Chapter 7 ~
Seventh Adhyaya
Section 1
First Khanda
2, 7-1:1. My speech rests in the mind, my mind rests in
speech. Appear to me (thou, the Highest Self)!
You (speech and mind) are the two pins (that hold the
wheels) of the Veda. May what I have learnt not
forsake me. I join day and night with what I have learnt. I
shall speak of the real, I shall speak the true.
May this protect me, may this protect the teacher! May it
protect me, may it protect the teacher, yea, the
teacher!


Part 3
Third Aranyaka
~ Chapter 1 ~
First Adhyaya
Section 1
First Khanda
3, 1-1:1. Next follows the Upanishad of the Samhita.
3, 1-1:2. The former half is the earth, the latter half the
heaven, their union the air, thus says Mandukeya;
their union is the ether, thus did Makshavya teach it.
3, 1-1:3. That air is not considered independent,
therefore I do not agree with his (Manduka's) son.
3, 1-1:4. Verily, the two are the same, therefore air is
considered independent, thus says Agastya. For it
is the same, whether they say air or ether.
3, 1-1:5. So far with reference to deities (mythologically);
now with reference to the body
(physiologically):
3, 1-1:6. The former half is speech, the latter half is mind,
their union breath (prana), thus says Suravira 
Mandukeya.
3, 1-1:7. But his eldest son said: The former half is mind,
the latter half speech. For we first conceive
with the mind indeed, and then we utter with speech.
Therefore the former half is indeed mind, the latter
half speech, but their union is really breath.
3, 1-1:8. Verily, it is the same with both, the father
(Mandukeya) and the son.
3, 1-1:9. This (meditation as here described), joined with
mind, speech, and breath, is (like) a chariot
drawn by two horses and one horse between them
(prashtivahana).
3, 1-1:10. And he who thus knows this union, becomes
united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of
countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full
age.
3, 1-1:11. Now all this comes from the Mandukeyas.
Section 2
Second Khanda
3, 1-2:1. Next comes the meditation as taught by
Sakalya.
3, 1-2:2. The first half is the earth, the second half
heaven, their uniting the rain, the uniter Parganya.
3, 1-2:3. And so it is when he (Parganya) rains thus
strongly, without ceasing, day and night,
3, 1-2:4. Then they say also (in ordinary language),
`Heaven and earth have come together.'
3, 1-2:5. So much with regard to the deities; now with
regard to the body:
3, 1-2:6. Every man is indeed like an egg. There are two
halves (of him), thus they say: `This half is the
earth, that half heaven.' And there between them is the
ether (the space of the mouth), like the ether 
between heaven and earth. In this ether there (in the
mouth) the breath is fixed, as in that other ether the
air is fixed. And as there are those three luminaries (in
heaven), there are these three luminaries in man.
3, 1-2:7. As there is that sun in heaven, there is this eye
in the head. As there is that lightning in the sky,
there is this heart in the body; as there is that fire on
earth, there is this seed in the member.
3, 1-2:8. Having thus represented the self (body) as the
whole world, Sakalya said: This half is the earth,
that half heaven.
3, 1-2:9. He who thus knows this union, becomes united
with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of
countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full
age.
Section 3
Third Khanda
3, 1-3:1. Next come the reciters of the Nirbhuga.
3, 1-3:2. Nirbhuga abides on earth, Pratrinna in heaven,
the Ubhayamantarena in the sky.
3, 1-3:3. Now, if any one should chide him who recites
the Nirbhuga, let him answer: `Thou art fallen
from the two lower places.' If any one should chide him
who recites the Pratrinna, let him answer: `Thou
art fallen from the two higher places.' But he who recites
the Ubhayamantarena, there is no chiding him.
3, 1-3:4. For when he turns out the Sandhi (the union of
words), that is the form of Nirbhuga; and when
he pronounces two syllables pure (without modification),
that is the form of Pratrinna. This comes first.
By the Ubhayamantara (what is between the two) both
are fulfilled (both the sandhi and the pada).
3, 1-3:5. Let him who wishes for proper food say the
Nirbhuga; let him who wishes for Svarga, say the
Pratrinna; let him who wishes for both say the
Ubhayamantarena. 
3, 1-3:6. Now if another man (an enemy) should chide
him who says the Nirbhuga, let him say to him:
`Thou hast offended the earth, the deity; the earth, the
deity, will strike thee.'
If another man should chide him who says the Pratrinna,
let him say to him: `Thou hast offended heaven,
the deity; heaven, the deity, will strike thee.'
If another man should chide him who says the
Ubhayamantarena, let him say to him: `Thou hast
offended
the sky, the deity; the sky, the deity, will strike thee.'
3, 1-3:7. And whatever the reciter shall say to one who
speaks to him or does not speak to him, depend
upon it, it will come to pass.
3, 1-3:8. But to a Brahmana let him not say anything
except what is auspicious.
3, 1-3:9. Only he may curse a Brahmana in excessive
wealth.
3, 1-3:10. Nay, not even in excessive wealth should he
curse a Brahmana, but he should say, `I bow
before Brahmanas,' thus says Suravira Mandukeya.
Section 4
Fourth Khanda
3, 1-4:1. Next follow the imprecations.
3, 1-4:2. Let him know that breath is the beam (on which
the whole house of the body rests).
3, 1-4:3. If any one (a Brahmana or another man) should
chide him, who by meditation has become that
breath as beam, then, if he thinks himself strong, he says:
`I grasped the breath, the beam, well; thou dost
not prevail against me who have grasped the breath as
the beam.' Let him say to him: `Breath, the beam,
will forsake thee.' 
3, 1-4:4. But if he thinks himself not strong, let him say to
him: `Thou couldst not grasp him who wishes
to grasp the breath as the beam. Breath, the beam, will
forsake thee.'
3, 1-4:5. And whatever the reciter shall say to one who
speaks to him or does not speak to him, depend
upon it, it will come to pass. But to a Brahmana let him
not say anything except what is auspicious. Only
he may curse a Brahmana in excessive wealth. Nay, not
even in excessive wealth should he curse a
Brahmana, but he should say, `I bow before Brahmanas,'
thus says Suravira Mandukeya.
Section 5
Fifth Khanda
3, 1-5:1. Now those who repeat the Nirbhuga say:
3, 1-5:2. `The former half is the first syllable, the latter half
the second syllable, and the space between the
first and second halves is the Samhita (union).'
3, 1-5:3. He who thus knows this Samhita (union),
becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of
countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full
age.
3, 1-5:4. Now Hrasva Mandukeya says: `We reciters of
Nirbhuga say, "Yes, the former half is the first
syllable, and the latter half the second syllable, but the
Samhita is the space between the first and second
halves in so far as by it one turns out the union (sandhi),
and knows what is the accent and what is not,
and distinguishes what is the mora and what is not."'
3, 1-5:5. He who thus knows this Samhita (union),
becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of
countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full
age.
3, 1-5:6. Now his middle son, the child of his mother
Pratibodhi, says: `One pronounces these two
syllables letter by letter, without entirely separating them,
and without entirely uniting them. Then that 
mora between the first and second halves, which
indicates the union, that is the Saman (evenness,
sliding). I therefore hold Saman only to be the Samhita
(union).
3, 1-5:7. This has also been declared by a Rishi (Rv. II,
23, 16):
3, 1-5:8. `O Brihaspati, they know nothing higher than
Saman.'
3, 1-5:9. He who thus knows this Samhita (union),
becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of
countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full
age.
Section 6
Sixth Khanda
3, 1-6:1. Tarukshya said: `The Samhita (union) is formed
by means of the Brihat and Rathantara Samans.'
3, 1-6:2. Verily, the Rathantara Saman is speech, the
Brihat Saman is breath. By both, by speech and
breath, the Samhita is formed.
3, 1-6:3. For this Upanishad (for acquiring from his
teacher the knowledge of this Samhita of speech and
breath) Tarukshya guards (his teacher's) cows a whole
year.
3, 1-6:4. For it alone Tarukshya guards the cows a whole
year.
3, 1-6:5. This has also been declared by a Rishi (Rv. X,
181, 1; and Rv. X, 181, 2):
3, 1-6:6. `Vasishtha carried hither the Rathantara;
`Bharadvaga brought hither the Brihat of Agni.'
3, 1-6:7. He who thus knows this Samhita (union),
becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of
countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full
age. 
3, 1-6:8. Kauntharavya said: `Speech is united with
breath, breath with the blowing air, the blowing air
with the Visvedevas, the Visvedevas with the heavenly
world, the heavenly world with Brahman. That
Samhita is called the gradual Samhita.'
3, 1-6:9. He who knows this gradual Samhita (union),
becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory
of countenance, and the world of Svarga, in exactly the
same manner as this Samhita, i.e. gradually.
3, 1-6:10. If that worshipper, whether for his own sake or
for that of another, recites (the Samhita), let
him know when he is going to recite, that this Samhita
went up to heaven, and that it will be even so with
those who by knowing it become Devas. May it always
be so!
3, 1-6:11. He who thus knows this Samhita (union),
becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of
countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full
age.
3, 1-6:12. Pankalakanda said: `The Samhita (union,
composition) is speech.'
3, 1-6:13. Verily, by speech the Vedas, by speech the
metres are composed. Friends unite through
speech, all beings unite through speech; therefore
speech is everything here.
3, 1-6:14. With regard to this (view of speech being more
than breath), it should be borne in mind that
when we thus repeat (the Veda) or speak, breath is
(absorbed) in speech; speech swallows breath. And
when we are silent or sleep, speech is (absorbed) in
breath; breath swallows speech. The two swallow
each other. Verily, speech is the mother, breath the son.
3, 1-6:15. This has been declared also by a Rishi (Rv. X,
114, 4):
3, 1-6:16. `There is one bird; (as wind) he has entered
the sky; (as breath or living soul) he saw this
whole world. With my ripe mind I saw him close to me (in
the heart); the mother (licks or) absorbs him 
(breath), and he absorbs the mother (speech).'
3, 1-6:17. He who thus knows this Samhita (union),
becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of
countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full
age.
3, 1-6:18. Next follows the Pragapati-Samhita.
3, 1-6:19. The former half is the wife, the latter half the
man; the result of their union the son; the act of
their union the begetting; that Samhita is Aditi
(indestructible).
3, 1-6:20. For Aditi (indestructible) is all this whatever
there is, father, mother, son, and begetting.
3, 1-6:21. This has also been declared by a Rishi (Rv. I,
189, 10):
3, 1-6:22. `Aditi is mother, is father, is son.'
3, 1-6:23. He who thus knows this Samhita (union),
becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of
countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full
age.

~ Chapter 2 ~
Second Adhyaya
Section 1
First Khanda
3, 2-1:1. Sthavira Sakalya said that breath is the beam,
and as the other beams rest on the house-beam,
thus the eye, the ear, the mind, the speech, the senses,
the body, the whole self rests on this breath.
3, 2-1:2. Of that self the breathing is like the sibilants, the
bones like the mutes, the marrow like the
vowels, and the fourth part, flesh, blood, and the rest, like
the semivowels, so said Hrasva Mandukeya. 
3, 2-1:3. To us it was said to be a triad only.
3, 2-1:4. Of that triad, viz. bones, marrow, and joints,
there are 360 (parts) on this side (the right), and
360 on that side (the left). They make 720 together, and
720 are the days and nights of the year. Thus that
self which consists of sight, hearing, metre, mind, and
speech is like unto the days.
3, 2-1:5. He who thus knows this self, which consists of
sight, hearing, metre, mind, and speech, as like
unto the days, obtains union, likeness, or nearness with
the days, has sons and cattle, and lives his full
age.
Section 2
Second Khanda
3, 2-2:1. Next comes Kauntharavya:
3, 2-2:2. There are 360 syllables (vowels), 360 sibilants
(consonants), 360 groups.
3, 2-2:3. What we called syllables are the days, what we
called sibilants are the nights, what we called
groups are the junctions of days and nights. So far with
regard to the gods (the days).
3, 2-2:4. Now with regard to the body. The syllables
which we explained mythologically, are
physiologically the bones; the sibilants which we
explained mythologically, are physiologically the
marrow.
3, 2-2:5. Marrow is the real breath (life), for marrow is
seed, and without breath (life) seed is not sown.
Or when it is sown without breath (life), it will decay, it will
not grow.
3, 2-2:6. The groups which we explained mythologically,
are physiologically the joints.
3, 2-2:7. Of that triad, viz. bones, marrow, and joints,
there are 540 (parts) on this side (the right), and 
540 on that side (the left). They make 1080 together, and
1080 are the rays of the sun. They make the
Brihati verses and the day (of the Mahavrata).
3, 2-2:8. Thus that self which consists of sight, hearing,
metre, mind, and speech is like unto the
syllables.
3, 2-2:9. He who knows this self which consists of sight,
hearing, metre, mind, and speech, as like unto
syllables, obtains union, likeness, or nearness with the
syllables, has sons and cattle, and lives his full age.
Section 3
Third Khanda
3, 2-3:1. Badhva says, there are four persons (to be
meditated on and worshipped).
3, 2-3:2. The person of the body, the person of the
metres, the person of the Veda, and the Great person.
3, 2-3:3. What we call the person of the body is this
corporeal self. Its essence is the incorporeal
conscious self.
3, 2-3:4. What we call the person of the metres is this
collection of letters (the Veda). Its essence is the
vowel a.
3, 2-3:5. What we call the person of the Veda is (the
mind) by which we know the Vedas, the Rig-veda,
Yagur-veda, and Sama-veda. Its essence is Brahman
(m.)
3, 2-3:6. Therefore let one chose a Brahman-priest who
is full of Brahman (the Veda), and is able to see
any flaw in the sacrifice.
3, 2-3:7. What we call the Great person is the year, which
causes some beings to fall together, and causes
others to grow up. Its essence is yonder sun.
3, 2-3:8. One should know that the incorporeal conscious
self and yonder sun are both one and the same. 
Therefore the sun appears to every man singly (and
differently).
3, 2-3:9. This has also been declared by a Rishi (Rv. I,
115, 1):
3, 2-3:10. `The bright face of the gods arose, the eye of
Mitra, Varuna, and Agni; it filled heaven and
earth and the sky, the sun is the self of all that rests and
moves.'
3, 2-3:11. `This I think to be the regular Samhita as
conceived by me,' thus said Badhva.
3, 2-3:12. For the Bahvrikas consider him (the self) in the
great hymn (mahad uktha), the Adhvaryus in
the sacrificial fire, the Khandogas in the Mahavrata
ceremony. Him they see in this earth, in heaven, in
the air, in the ether, in the water, in herbs, in trees, in the
moon, in the stars, in all beings. Him alone
they call Brahman.
3, 2-3:13. That self which consists of sight, hearing,
metre, mind, and speech is like unto the year.
3, 2-3:14. He who recites to another that self which
consists of sight, hearing, metre, mind, and speech,
and is like unto the year,
Section 4
Fourth Khanda
3, 2-4:1. To him the Vedas yield no more milk, he has no
luck in what he has learnt (from his Guru); he
does not know the path of virtue.
3, 2-4:2. This has also been declared by a Rishi (Rv. X,
71, 6):
3, 2-4:3. `He who has forsaken the friend (the Veda), that
knows his friends, in his speech there is no
luck. Though he hears, he hears in vain, for he does not
know the path of virtue.'
3, 2-4:4. Here it is clearly said that he has no luck in what
he has learnt, and that he does not know the
path of virtue.
3, 2-4:5. Therefore let no one who knows this, lay the
sacrificial fire (belonging to the Mahavrata) for
another, let him not sing the Samans of the Mahavrata for
another, let him not recite the Sastras of that
day for another.
3, 2-4:6. However, let him willingly do this for a father or
for an Akarya; for that is done really for
himself.
3, 2-4:7. We have said that the incorporeal conscious
self and the sun are one. When these two become
separated, the sun is seen as if it were the moon; no rays
spring from it; the sky is red like madder; the
patient cannot retain the wind, his head smells bad like a
raven's nest: let him know then that his self
(in the body) is gone, and that he will not live very long.
3, 2-4:8. Then whatever he thinks he has to do, let him
do it, and let him recite the following hymns: Yad
anti yak ka durake (Rv. IX, 67, 21-27); Ad it pratnasya
retasah (Rv. VIII, 6, 30); Yatra brahma pavamana
(Rv. IX, 113, 6-11); Ud vayam tamasas pari (Rv. I, 50,
10).
3, 2-4:9. Next, when the sun is seen pierced, and seems
like the nave of a cart-wheel, when he sees his
own shadow pierced, let him know then that it is so (as
stated before, i.e. that he is going to die soon).
3, 2-4:10. Next, when he sees himself in a mirror or in the
water with a crooked head, or without a head,
or when his pupils are seen inverted or not straight, let
him know then that it is so.
3, 2-4:11. Next, let him cover his eyes and watch, then
threads are seen as if falling together. But if he
does not see them, let him know then that it is so.
3, 2-4:12. Next, let him cover his ears and listen, and
there will be a sound as if of a burning fire or of a 
carriage. But if he does not hear it, let him know then that
it is so.
3, 2-4:13. Next, when fire looks blue like the neck of a
peacock, or when he sees lightning in a cloudless
sky, or no lightning in a clouded sky, or when he sees as
it were bright rays in a dark cloud, let him know
then that it is so.
3, 2-4:14. Next, when he sees the ground as if it were
burning, let him know that it is so.
3, 2-4:15. These are the visible signs (from 7-14).
3, 2-4:16. Next come the dreams.
3, 2-4:17. If he sees a black man with black teeth, and
that man kills him; or a boar kills him; a monkey
jumps on him; the wind carries him along quickly; having
swallowed gold he spits it out; he eats honey;
he chews stalks; he carries a red lotus; he drives with
asses and boars; wearing a wreath of red flowers
(naladas) he drives a black cow with a black calf, facing
the south,
3, 2-4:18. If a man sees any one of these (dreams), let
him fast, and cook a pot of milk, sacrifice it,
accompanying each oblation with a verse of the Ratri
hymn (Rv. X, 127), and then, after having fed the
Brahmanas, with other food (prepared at his house) eat
himself the (rest of the) oblation.
3, 2-4:19. Let him know that the person within all beings,
not heard here, not reached, not thought, not
subdued, not seen, not understood, not classed, but
hearing, thinking, seeing, classing, sounding,
understanding, knowing, is his Self.
Section 5
Fifth Khanda
3, 2-5:1. Now next the Upanishad of the whole speech.
True all these are Upanishads of the whole speech, but
this they call so (chiefly). 
3, 2-5:2. The mute consonants represent the earth, the
sibilants the sky, the vowels heaven.
The mute consonants represent Agni (fire), the sibilants
air, the vowels the sun.
The mute consonants represent the Rig-veda, the
sibilants the Yagur-veda, the vowels the Sama-veda.
The mute consonants represent the eye, the sibilants the
ear, the vowels the mind.
The mute consonants represent the up-breathing, the
sibilants the down-breathing, the vowels the backbreathing.
3, 2-5:3. Next comes this divine lute (the human body,
made by the gods). The lute made by man is an
imitation of it.
3, 2-5:4. As there is a head of this, so there is a head of
that (lute, made by man). As there is a stomach
of this, so there is the cavity (in the board) of that. As
there is a tongue of this, so there is a tongue in
that. As there are fingers of this, so there are strings of
that. As there are vowels of this, so there are
tones of that. As there are consonants of this, so there
are touches of that. As this is endowed with sound
and firmly strung, so that is endowed with sound and
firmly strung. As this is covered with a hairy skin,
so that is covered with a hairy skin.
3, 2-5:5. Verily, in former times they covered a lute with a
hairy skin.
3, 2-5:6. He who knows this lute made by the Devas (and
meditates on it), is willingly listened to, his
glory fills the earth, and wherever they speak Aryan
languages, there they know him.
3, 2-5:7. Next follows the verse, called vagrasa, the
essence of speech. When a man reciting or speaking
in an assembly does not please, let him say this verse:
3, 2-5:8. `May the queen of all speech, who is covered,
as it were, by the lips, surrounded by teeth, as if by
spears, who is a thunderbolt, help me to speak well.' This
is the vagrasa, the essence of speech.
Section 6
Sixth Khanda
3, 2-6:1. Next Krishna-Harita confided this Brahmana
concerning speech to him (his pupil):
3, 2-6:2. Pragapati, the year, after having sent forth all
creatures, burst. He put himself together again by
means of khandas (Vedas). Because he put himself
together again by means of khandas, therefore (the
text of the Veda) is called Samhita (put together).
3, 2-6:3. Of that Samhita the letter n is the strength, the
letter sh the breath and self (atman).
3, 2-6:4. He who knows the Rik verses and the letters n
and sh for every Samhita, he knows the Samhita
with strength and breath. Let him know that this is the life
of the Samhita.
3, 2-6:5. If the pupil asks, `Shall I say it with the letter n or
without it?' let the teacher say, `With the
letter n' And if he asks, `Shall I say it with the letter sh or
without it?' let the teacher say, `With the letter
sh.'
3, 2-6:6. Hrasva Mandukeya said: `If we here recite the
verses according to the Samhita (attending to the
necessary changes of n and s into n and sh), and if we
say the adhyaya of Mandukeya (Ait. Ar. III, 1),
then the letters n and sh (strength and breath) have by
this been obtained for us.'
3, 2-6:7. Sthavira Sakalya said: `If we recite the verses
according to the Samhita, and if we say the
adhyaya of Mandukeya, then the letters n and sh have by
this been obtained for us.'
3, 2-6:8. Here the Rishis, the Kavasheyas, knowing this,
said: `Why should we repeat (the Veda), why 
should we sacrifice? We offer as a sacrifice breath in
speech, or speech in breath. What is the beginning
(of one), that is the end (of the other).'
3, 2-6:9. Let no one tell these Samhitas (Ait. Ar. III, 1-2)
to one who is not a resident pupil, who has not
been with his teacher at least one year, and who is not
himself to become an instructor. Thus say the
teachers, yea, thus say the teachers.
2, 3-4:2. Note: All these are technicalities connected with
the singing and reciting of the uktha. The
commentator says: The stoma is a collection of single
Rik verses occurring in the trikas which have to be
sung. The Trivrit stoma, as explained in the Samabrahmana, is as follows: There are three Suktas, each
consisting of three verses, the first being upasmai gayata,
S. V. Uttararkika I, 1, 1 = Rv. IX, 11. The
Udgatri first sings the first three verses in each hymn.
This is the first round. He then sings the three
middle verses in each hymn. This is the second round.
He lastly sings the last three verses in each hymn.
This is the third round. This song is called Udyati.
The Pankadasa stoma is formed out of one Sukta only,
consisting of three verses. In the first round he
sings the first verse three times, the second and third
once. In the second round he sings the middle verse
three times, in the third round he sings the last verse
three times. This song is called Vishtuti.
The Saptadasa stoma is formed in the same manner,
only that in the first round he sings the first verse
three times, in the second the middle verse three times, in
the third round the middle and last verses three
times. This song is called Dasasapta.
The Ekavimsa stoma is formed in the same manner, only
that in the first round he sings the last verse
once, in the second the first verse once, in the third the
middle verse once, while the other verses are each
repeated three times. This song is called Saptasaptini.
The Pankavimsa stoma is formed in the same manner,
only that in the first round he sings the first verse 
three times, the second four times, the last once; in the
second round the first once, the second three times,
the third four times; in the third round the first five times,
the second once, the last three times; or he
sings in the third round the first verse four times, the
second twice, the last three times.
Sayana in his commentary on the Ait. Ar. takes the Trivrit
stoma to be formed out of three hymns, each
consisting of three verses, while he says that the other
stomas are formed out of one hymn only. B. and
R., s. v. trivrit, state that this stoma consists of verses 1,
4, 7; 2, 5, 8; and 3, 6, 9 of the Rig-veda hymn IX,
11, but, accoording to Sayana, the stoma consists (1) of
the first verses of the three Suktas, ukpasmai
gayata, davidyutatya, and pavamanasya at the beginning
of the Sama-veda-Uttararkika, (2) of the second,
(3) of the third verses of the same three hymns.
Mahidhara (Yv. X, 9) takes the same view, though the
MSS. seem to have left out the description of the second
paryaya, while Sayana in his commentary to the
Tandya-brahmana seems to support the opinion of B. and
R. There is an omission, however, in the
printed text of the commentary, which makes it difficult to
see the exact meaning of Sayana.
The Pankadasa stoma is well deccribed by Sayana,
Tandya Br. II, 4. Taking the Sukta agna a yahi
(Uttararkika I, 1, 4 = Rv. VI, 16, 10-12), he shows the
stoma to consist of (1) verse 1 x 3, 2, 3; (2) verse 1,
2 x 3, 3; (3) verse 1, 2, 3 x 3.
The five Samans are explained by the commentator. The
Gayatra is formed out of the Rik (III, 62, 10) tat
savitur varenyam. The Rathantara is formed out of the
Rik (VII, 32, 22) abhi tva sura nonuma. The
Brihat is formed out of the Rik (VI, 46, 1) tvam id dhi
havamahe. The Bhadra is formed out of the Rik
(X, 157, 1) ima nu kam. The Ragana is formed out of the
Rik (VII, 27, 1) indram naro nemadhita.
The metres require no explanation.
In identifying certain portions of the Nishkevalya hymn
with a bird, the head of the bird corresponds to 
the hymns indram id gathinah, &c.; the right wing to the
hymns abhi tva sura, &c.; the left wing to the
hymns tvam id dhi, &c.; the tail to the hymns ima nu kam,
&c.; the body to the hymns tad id asa, &c. All
this was explained in the first Aranyaka.
3, 2-6:9. Note: The strict prohibition uttered at the end
of the third Aranyaka, not to divulge a
knowledge of the Samhita-upanishad (Ait. Ar. III, 1-2), as
here explained, is peculiar. It would have
seemed self-evident that, like the rest of the sruti or
sacred literature, the Aranyaka too, and evey portion
of it, could have been learnt from the mouth of a teacher
only, and according to rule (niyamena), i.e. by a
pupil performing all the duties of a student (brahmakarin),
so that no one except a regular pupil
(antevasin) could possibly gain access to it. Nor can
there be any doubt that we ought to take the words
asamvatsaravasin and apravaktri as limitations, and to
translate, `Let no one tell these Samhitas to any
pupil who has not at least been a year with his master,
and who does not mean to become a teacher in
turn.'
That this is the right view is confirmed by similar
injunctions given at the end of the fifth Aranyaka. Here
we have first some rules as to who is qualified to recite
the Mahavrata. No one is permitted to do so, who
has not passed throught the Diksha, the initiation for the
Agnishtoma. If the Mahavrata is performed as a
Sattra, the sacrificer is a Hotri priest, and he naturally has
passed through tha ceremony. But if the
Mahavrata is performed as an Ekaha or Ahina ceremony,
anybody might be the sacrificer, and therefore it
was necessary to say that no one who is adikshita,
uninitiated, should recite it for another person; not
should he do so, when the Mahavrata is performed
without (or with) an altar, or if it does not last one
year. In saying, however, that one should not recite the
Mahavrata for another person, parents and
teachers are not to be understood as included, because
what is done for them, is done for ouselves.
After these restrictions as to the recitation of the
Mahavrata, follow other restrictions as to the teaching of
it, and here we read, as at the end of the Upanishad: 
4. `Let no one teach this day, the Mahavrata, to one who
is not a regular pupil (antevasin), and has been
so for one year, certainly not to one who has not been so
for one year; not to one who is not a brahmakarin
and does not study the same Veda, certainly not to one
who does not study the same Veda; nor to one who
does not come to him.
5. `Let the teaching not be more than saying it once or
twice, twice only.
6. `One man should tell it to one man, so says
Gatukarnya.
7. `Not to a child, nor to a man in his third stage of life.
8. `The teacher and pupil should not stand, nor walk, nor
lie down, nor sit on a couch; but they should
both sit on the ground.
9. `The pupil should not lean backward while learning,
nor lean forward. He should not be covered with
too much clothing, nor assume the postures of a devotee,
but without using any of the apparel of a devotee,
simply elevate his knees. Nor should he learn, when he
has eaten flesh, when he has seen blood, or a
corpse, or when he has done an unlawful thing; when he
has anointed his eyes, oiled or rubbed his body,
when he has been shaved or bathed, put colour on, or
ornamented himself with flower-wreaths, when he
has been writing or effacing his writing.
10. `Nor should he finish the reading in one day, so says
Gatukarnya, while according to Galava, he
should finish it in one day. Agnivesyayana holds that he
should finish all before the Trikasitis, and then
rest in another place finishing it.
11. `And in the place where he reads this, he should not
read anything else, though he may read this (the
Mdahavrata) where he has read something else.
12. `No one should bathe and become a snataka who
does not read this. Even if he has read many other 
things, he should not become a snataka if he has not
read this.
13. `Nor should he forget it, and even if he should forget
anything else, he should not forget this.
14. `No, he should never forget this.
15. `If he does not forget this, it will be enough for himself
(or for acquiring a knowledge of the Self).
16. `It is enough, let him know this to be true.
17. `Let him who knows this not communicate, nor dine,
nor amuse himself with any one who does not
know it.'
Then follow some more rules as to the reading of the
Veda in general:
18. `When the old water that stood round the roots of
trees is dried up (after about the month of Pausha,
January to February) he should not read; nor (at any
time) in the morning or in the afternoon, when the
shadows meet (he should begin at sunrise so soon as the
shadows divide, and end in the evening before
they fall together). Nor should he read when a cloud has
risen; and when there is an unseasonable rain
(after the months of Sravana and Bhadrapada, August
and September) he should stop his Vedic reading
for three nights. Nor should he at that time tell stories,
not even during the night, nor should he glory in
his knowledge.
19. `This (the Veda thus learnt and studied) is the name
of that Great Being; and he who thus knows the
name of that Great Being, he becomes Brahman, yea, he
becomes Brahman.'


