~ Chapter 1 ~
First Prapathaka
Section 1
The laying of the formerly-described sacrificial fires is
indeed the sacrifice of Brahman. Therefore let the
sacrificer, after he has laid those fires, meditate on the
Self. Thus only does the sacrificer become
complete and faultless.
But who is to be meditated on? He who is called Prana
(breath). Of him there is this story:
Section 2
A King, named Brihadratha, having established his son in
his sovereignty, went into the forest, because
he considered this body as transient, and had obtained
freedom from all desires. Having performed the
highest penance, he stands there, with uplifted arms,
looking up to the sun. At the end of a thousand
(days), the Saint Sakayanya, who knew the Self, came
near, burning with splendour, like a fire without
smoke. He said to the King: `Rise, rise! Choose a boon!' 
The King, bowing before him, said: `O Saint, I know not
the Self, thou knowest the essence (of the Self).
We have heard so. Teach it us.'
Sakayanya replied: `This was achieved of yore; but what
thou askest is difficult to obtain. O Aikshvaka,
choose other pleasures.'
The King, touching the Saint's feet with his head, recited
this Gatha:
Section 3
`O Saint, What is the use of the enjoyment of pleasures in
this offensive, pithless body a mere mass of
bones, skin, sinews, marrow, flesh, seed, blood, mucus,
tears, phlegm, ordure, water, bile, and slime!
What is the use of the enjoyment of pleasures in this body
which is assailed by lust, hatred, greed,
delusion, fear, anguish, jealousy, separation from what is
loved, union with what is not loved, hunger,
thirst, old age, death, illness, grief, and other evils!
Section 4
And we see that all this is perishable, as these flies,
gnats, and other insects, as herbs and trees, growing
and decaying. And what of these? There are other great
ones, mighty wielders of bows, rulers of empires,
Sudyumna, Bhuridyumna, Indradyumna, Kuvalayasva,
Yauvanasva, Vadhryasva, Asvapati, Sasabindu,
Hariskandra, Ambarisha, Nahusha, Ananata, Saryati,
Yayati, Anaranya, Ukshasena, &c., and kings such
as Marutta, Bharata (Daushyanti), and others, who before
the eyes of their whole family surrendered the
greatest happiness, and passed on from this world to
that. And what of these? There are other great ones.
We see the destruction of Gandharvas, Asuras, Yakshas,
Rakshasas, Bhutas, Ganas, Pisakas, snakes, and
vampires. And what of these? There is the drying up of
other great oceans, the falling of mountains, the
moving of the pole-star, the cutting of the wind-ropes (that
hold the stars), the submergence of the earth,
and the departure of the gods (suras) from their place. In
such a world as this, what is the use of the 
enjoyment of pleasures, if he who has fed on them is
seen to return (to this world) again and again! Deign
therefore to take me out! In this world I am like a frog in a
dry well. O Saint, thou art my way, thou art
my way.'

~ Chapter 2 ~
Second Prapathaka
Section 1
Then the Saint Sakayanya, well pleased, said to the King:
`Great King Brihadratha, thou banner of the
race of Ikshvaku, quickly obtaining a knowledge of Self,
thou art happy, and art renowned by the name of
Marut, the wind. This indeed is thy Self.'
`Which, O Saint,' said the King.
Then the Saint said to him:
Section 2
`He who, without stopping the out-breathing, proceeds
upwards (from the sthula to the sukshma sarira),
and who, modified (by impressions), and yet not modified,
drives away the darkness (of error), he is the
Self. Thus said the Saint Maitri.' And Sakayanya said to
the King Brihadratha: `He who in perfect rest,
rising from this body (both from the sthula and sukshma),
and reaching the highest light, comes forth in
his own form, he is the Self (thus said Sakayanya); this is
the immortal, the fearless, this is Brahman.'
Section 3
`Now then this is the science of Brahman, and the
science of all Upanishads, O King, which was told us
by the Saint Maitri. I shall tell it to thee:
`We hear (in the sacred records) that there were once the
Valakhilyas, who had left off all evil, who were 
vigorous and passionless. They said to the Pragapati
Kratu: "O Saint, this body is without intelligence,
like a cart. To what supernatural being belongs this great
power by which such a body has been made
intelligent? Or who is the driver? What thou knowest, O
Saint, tell us that."' Pragapati answered and
said:
Section 4
`He who in the Sruti is called "Standing above," like
passionless ascetics amidst the objects of the world,
he, indeed, the pure, clean, undeveloped, tranquil,
breathless, bodiless, endless, imperishable, firm,
everlasting, unborn, independent one, stands in his own
greatness, and by him has this body been made
intelligent, and he is also the driver of it.'
They said: `O Saint, How has this been made intelligent
by such a being as this which has no desires, and
how is he its driver?' He answered them and said:
Section 5
`That Self which is very small, invisible,
incomprehensible, called Purusha, dwells of his own will
here in
part; just as a man who is fast asleep awakes of his own
will. And this part (of the Self) which is entirely
intelligent, reflected in man (as the sun in different
vessels of water), knowing the body (kshetragna),
attested by his conceiving, willing, and believing, is
Pragapati (lord of creatures), called Visva. By him,
the intelligent, is this body made intelligent, and he is the
driver thereof.'
They said to him: `O Saint, if this has been made
intelligent by such a being as this, which has no desires,
and if he is the driver thereof, how was it?' He answered
them and said:
Section 6
`In the beginning Pragapati (the lord of creatures) stood
alone. He had no happiness, when alone. 
Meditating on himself, he created many creatures. He
looked on them and saw they were, like a stone,
without understanding, and standing like a lifeless post.
He had no happiness. He thought, I shall enter
within, that they may awake. Making himself like air
(vayu) he entered within. Being one, he could not
do it. Then dividing himself fivefold, he is called Prana,
Apana, Samana, Udana, Vyana. Now that air
which rises upwards, is Prana. That which moves
downwards, is Apana. That by which these two are
supposed to be held, is Vyana. That which carries the
grosser material of food to the Apana, and brings
the subtler material to each limb, has the name Samana.
[After these (Prana, Apana, Samana) comes the
work of the Vyana, and between them (the Prana, Apana,
and Samana on one side and the Vyana on the
other) comes the rising of the Udana.] That which brings
up or carries down what has been drunk and
eaten, is the Udana.
Now the Upamsu-vessel (or prana) depends on the
Antaryama-vessel (apana) and the Antaryama-vessel
(apana) on the Upamsu-vessel (prana), and between
these two the self-resplendent (Self) produced heat.
This heat is the purusha (person), and this purusha is
Agni Vaisvanara. And thus it is said elsewhere:
"Agni Vaisvanara is the fire within man by which the food
that is eaten is cooked, i.e. digested. Its noise
is that which one hears, if one covers one's ears. When a
man is on the point of departing this life, he
does not hear that noise."
Now he, having divided himself fivefold, is hidden in a
secret place (buddhi), assuming the nature of
mind, having the pranas as his body, resplendent, having
true concepts, and free like ether. Feeling even
thus that he has not attained his object, he thinks from
within the interior of the heart, "Let me enjoy
objects." Therefore, having first broken open these five
apertures (of the senses), he enjoys the objects by
means of the five reins. This means that these perceptive
organs (ear, skin, eye, tongue, nose) are his
reins; the active organs (tongue (for speaking), hands,
feet, anus, generative organ) his horses; the body
his chariot, the mind the charioteer, the whip being the
temperament. Driven by that whip, this body goes 
round like the wheel driven by the potter. This body is
made intelligent, and he is the driver thereof.
This is indeed the Self, who seeming to be filled with
desires, and seeming to be overcome by bright or
dark fruits of action, wanders about in every body (himself
remaining free). Because he is not manifest,
because he is infinitely small, because he is invisible,
because he cannot be grasped, because he is attached
to nothing, therefore he, seeming to be changing, an
agent in that which is not (prakriti), is in reality not
an agent and unchanging. He is pure, firm, stable,
undefiled, unmoved, free from desire, remaining a
spectator, resting in himself. Having concealed himself in
the cloak of the three qualities he appears as
the enjoyer of rita, as the enjoyer of rita (of his good
works).'

~ Chapter 3 ~
Third Prapathaka
Section 1
The Valakhilyas said to Pragapati Kratu: `O Saint, if thou
thus showest the greatness of that Self, then
who is that other different one, also called Self, who really
overcome by bright and dark fruits of action,
enters on a good or bad birth? Downward or upward is
his course, and overcome by the pairs (distinction
between hot and cold, pleasure and pain, &c.) he roams
about.'
Section 2
Pragapati Kratu replied: `There is indeed that other
different one, called the elemental Self (Bhutatma),
who, overcome by bright and dark fruits of action, enters
on a good or bad birth: downward or upward is
his course, and overcome by the pairs he roams about.
And this is his explanation: The five Tanmatras
(sound, touch, form, taste, smell) are called Bhuta; also
the five Mahabhutas (gross elements) are called 
Bhuta. Then the aggregate of all these is called sarira,
body. And lastly he of whom it was said that he
dwelt in the body, he is called Bhutatma, the elemental
Self Thus his immortal Self is like a drop of water
on a lotus leaf, and he himself is overcome by the
qualities of nature. Then, because he is thus overcome,
he becomes bewildered, and because he is bewildered,
he saw not the creator, the holy Lord, abiding
within himself. Carried along by the waves of the
qualities, darkened in his imaginations, unstable,
fickle, crippled, full of desires, vacillating, he enters into
belief, believing "I am he," "this is mine;" he
binds his Self by his Self, as a bird with a net, and
overcome afterwards by the fruits of what he has done,
he enters on a good and bad birth; downward or upward
is his course, and overcome by the pairs he roams
about.'
They asked: `Which is it?' And he answered them:
Section 3
`This also has elsewhere been said: He who acts, is the
elemental Self; he who causes to act by means of
the organs, is the inner man (antahpurusha). Now as
even a ball of iron, pervaded (overcome) by fire, and
hammered by smiths, becomes manifold (assumes
different forms, such as crooked, round, large, small),
thus the elemental Self, pervaded (overcome) by the
inner man, and hammered by the qualities, becomes
manifold. And the four tribes (mammals, birds, &c.), the
fourteen worlds (Bhur, &c.), with all the
number of beings, multiplied eighty-four times, all this
appears as manifoldness. And those multiplied
things are impelled by man (purusha) as the wheel by the
potter. And as when the ball of iron is
hammered, the fire is not overcome, so the (inner) man is
not overcome, but the elemental Self is
overcome, because it has united itself (with the
elements).
Section 4
And it has been said elsewhere: This body produced from
marriage, and endowed with growth in 
darkness, came forth by the urinary passage, was built up
with bones, bedaubed with flesh, thatched with
skin, filled with ordure, urine, bile, slime, marrow, fat, oil,
and many impurities besides, like a treasury
full of treasures.
Section 5
And it has been said elsewhere: Bewilderment, fear, grief,
sleep, sloth, carelessness, decay, sorrow,
hunger, thirst, niggardliness, wrath, infidelity, ignorance,
envy, cruelty, folly, shamelessness, meanness,
pride, changeability, these are the results of the quality of
darkness (tamah).
Inward thirst, fondness, passion, covetousness,
unkindness, love, hatred, deceit, jealousy, vain
restlessness, fickleness, unstableness, emulation, greed,
patronising of friends, family pride, aversion to
disagreeable objects, devotion to agreeable objects,
whispering, prodigality, these are the results of the
quality of passion (ragas).
By these he is filled, by these he is overcome, and
therefore this elemental Self assumes manifold forms,
yes, manifold forms.'

~ Chapter 4 ~
Fourth Prapathaka
Section 1
The Valakhilyas, whose passions were subdued,
approached him full of amazement and said: `O Saint, we
bow before thee; teach thou, for thou art the way, and
there is no other for us. What process is there for
the elemental Self, by which, after leaving this (identity
with the elemental body), he obtains union with
the (true) Self?' Pragapati Kratu said to them:
Section 2
 
 `It has been said elsewhere: Like the waves in large
rivers, that which has been done before, cannot be
turned back, and, like the tide of the sea, the approach of
death is hard to stem. Bound by the fetters of
the fruits of good and evil, like a cripple; without freedom,
like a man in prison; beset by many fears, like
one standing before Yama (the judge of the dead);
intoxicated by the wine of illusion, like one intoxicated
by wine; rushing about, like one possessed by an evil
spirit; bitten by the world, like one bitten by a great
serpent; darkened by passion, like the night; illusory, like
magic; false, like a dream; pithless, like the
inside of the Kadali; changing its dress in a moment, like
an actor; fair in appearance, like a painted wall,
thus they call him; and therefore it is said:
Sound, touch, and other things are like nothings; if the
elemental Self is attached to them, it will not
remember the Highest Place.
Section 3
This is indeed the remedy for the elemental Self:
Acquirement of the knowledge of the Veda, performance
of one's own duty, therefore conformity on the part of
each man to the order to which he happens to
belong. This is indeed the rule for one's own duty, other
performances are like the mere branches of a
stem. Through it one obtains the Highest above,
otherwise one falls downward. Thus is one's own duty
declared, which is to be found in the Vedas. No one
belongs truly to an order (asrama) who transgresses
his own law. And if people say, that a man does not
belong to any of the orders, and that he is an ascetic,
this is wrong, though, on the other hand, no one who is
not an ascetic brings his sacrificial works to
perfection or obtains knowledge of the Highest Self. For
thus it is said:
By ascetic penance goodness is obtained, from goodness
understanding is reached, from understanding the
Self is obtained, and he who has obtained that, does not
return.
Section 4 
"Brahman is," thus said one who knew the science of
Brahman; and this penance is the door to
Brahman, thus said one who by penance had cast off all
sin. The syllable Om is the manifest greatness of
Brahman, thus said one who well grounded (in Brahman)
always meditates on it. Therefore by
knowledge, by penance, and by meditation is Brahman
gained. Thus one goes beyond Brahman
(Hiranyagarbha), and to a divinity higher than the gods;
nay, he who knows this, and worships Brahman
by these three (by knowledge, penance, and meditation),
obtains bliss imperishable, infinite, and
unchangeable. Then freed from those things (the senses
of the body, &c.) by which he was filled and
overcome, a mere charioteer, he obtains union with the
Self.'
Section 5
The Valakhilyas said: `O Saint, thou art the teacher, thou
art the teacher. What thou hast said, has been
properly laid up in our mind. Now answer us a further
question: Agni, Vayu, Aditya, Time (kala) which
is Breath (prana), Food (anna), Brahma, Rudra, Vishnu,
thus do some meditate on one, some on another.
Say which of these is the best for us.' He said to them:
Section 6
`These are but the chief manifestations of the highest, the
immortal, the incorporeal Brahman. He who is
devoted to one, rejoices here in his world (presence),
thus he said. Brahman indeed is all this, and a man
may meditate on, worship, or discard also those which
are its chief manifestations. With these (deities) he
proceeds to higher and higher worlds, and when all things
perish, he becomes one with the Purusha, yes,
with the Purusha.'

~ Chapter 5 ~
Fifth Prapathaka
Section 1 
Next follows Kutsayana's hymn of praise:
`Thou art Brahma, and thou art Vishnu, thou art Rudra,
thou Pragapati, thou art Agni, Varuna, Vayu,
thou art Indra, thou the Moon.
Thou art Anna (the food or the eater), thou art Yama, thou
art the Earth, thou art All, thou art the
Imperishable. In thee all things exist in many forms,
whether for their natural or for their own (higher)
ends.
Lord of the Universe, glory to thee! Thou art the Self of
All, thou art the maker of All, the enjoyer of All;
thou art all life, and the lord of all pleasure and joy. Glory
to thee, the tranquil, the deeply hidden, the
incomprehensible, the immeasurable, without beginning
and without end.'

Section 2
`In the beginning darkness (tamas) alone was this. It was
in the Highest, and, moved by the Highest, it
becomes uneven. Thus it becomes obscurity (ragas).
Then this obscurity, being moved, becomes uneven.
Thus it becomes goodness (sattva). Then this goodness,
being moved, the essence flowed forth. This is
that part (or state of Self) which is entirely intelligent,
reflected in man (as the sun is in different vessels
of water) knowing the body (kshetragna), attested by his
conceiving, willing, and believing, it is
Pragapati, called Visva. His manifestations have been
declared before. Now that part of him which
belongs to darkness, that, O students, is he who is called
Rudra. That part of him which belongs to
obscurity, that, O students, is he who is called Brahma.
That part of him which belongs to goodness, that,
O students, is he who is called Vishnu. He being one,
becomes three, becomes eight, becomes eleven,
becomes twelve, becomes infinite. Because he thus
came to be, he is the Being (neut.), he moves about,
having entered all beings, he has become the Lord of all
beings. He is the Self within and without, yes, 
within and without.'

~ Chapter 6 ~
Sixth Prapathaka
Section 1
He (the Self) bears the Self in two ways, as he who is
Prana (breath), and as he who is Aditya (the sun).
Therefore there are two paths for him, within and without,
and they both turn back in a day and night.
The Sun is the outer Self, the inner Self is Breath. Hence
the motion of the inner Self is inferred from the
motion of the outer Self. For thus it is said:
`He who knows, and has thrown off all evil, the overseer
of the senses, the pure-minded, firmly grounded
(in the Self) and looking away (from all earthly objects),
he is the same.' Likewise the motion of the outer
Self is inferred from the motion of the inner Self. For thus
it is said:
`He who within the sun is the golden person, who looks
upon this earth from his golden place, he is the
same who, after entering the inner lotus of the heart,
devours food (perceives sensuous objects, &c.)'
Section 2
And he who having entered the inner lotus of the heart,
devours food, the same, having gone to the sky as
the fire of the sun, called Time, and being invisible,
devours all beings as his food.
What is that lotus and of what is it made? the Valakhilyas
ask.)
That lotus is the same as the ether; the four quarters, and
the four intermediate points are its leaves.
These two, Breath and the Sun, move on near to each
other (in the heart and in the ether). Let him 
worship these two, with the syllable Om, with the Vyahriti
words (bhuh, bhuvah, svar), and with the
Savitri hymn.
Section 3
There are two forms of Brahman, the material (effect) and
the immaterial (cause). The material is false,
the immaterial is true. That which is true is Brahman, that
which is Brahman is light, and that which is
light is the Sun. And this Sun became the Self of that
Om.
He divided himself threefold, for Om consists of three
letters, a+u+m. Through them all this is contained
in him as warp and woof. For thus it is said:
`Meditate on that Sun as Om, join your Self (the breath)
with the (Self of the) Sun.'
Section 4
And thus it has been said elsewhere: The Udgitha (of the
Sama-veda) is the Pranava (of the Rig-veda),
and the Pranava is the Udgitha, and thus the Sun is
Udgitha, and he is Pranava or Om. For thus it is said:
`The Udgitha, called Pranava, the leader (in the
performance of sacrifices), the bright, the sleepless, free
from old age and death, three-footed, consisting of three
letters (a+u+m), and likewise to be known as
fivefold (five pranas) placed in the cave.' And it is also
said:
`The three-footed Brahman has its root upward, the
branches are ether, wind, fire, water, earth, &c. This
one Asvattha by name, the world, is Brahman, and of it
that is the light which is called the Sun, and it is
also the light of that syllable Om. Therefore let him for
ever worship that (breath and sun, as
manifestations of Brahman) with the syllable Om.'
He alone enlightens us. For thus it is said:
`This alone is the pure syllable, this alone is the highest
syllable; he who knows that syllable only, 
whatever he desires, is his.'
Section 5
And thus it has been said elsewhere: This Om is the
sound-endowed body of him (Pranadityatman). This
is his gender-endowed body, viz. feminine, masculine,
neuter. This is his light-endowed body, viz. Agni,
Vayu, Aditya. This is his lord-endowed body, viz.
Brahma, Rudra, Vishnu. This is his mouth-endowed
body, viz. Garhapatya, Dakshinagni, Ahavaniya. This is
his knowledge-endowed body, viz. Rik, Yagus,
Saman. This is his world-endowed body, viz. Bhuh,
Bhuvah, Svar. This is his time-endowed body, viz.
Past, Present, Future. This is his heat-endowed body,
viz. Breath, Fire, Sun. This is his growth-endowed
body, viz. Food, Water, Moon. This is his thoughtendowed body, viz. intellect, mind, personality. This
is his breath-endowed body, viz. Prana, Apana, Vyana.
Therefore by the aforesaid syllable Om are all
these here enumerated bodies praised and identified
(with the Pranadityatman). For thus it is said:
`O Satyakama, the syllable Om is the high and the low
Brahman.'
Section 6
This (world) was unuttered. Then forsooth Pragapati,
having brooded, uttered it in the words Bhuh,
Bhuvah, Svar. This is the grossest body of that
Pragapati, consisting of the three worlds. Of that body
Svar is the head, Bhuvah the navel, Bhuh the feet, the
sun the eye. For in the eye is fixed man's great
measure, because with the eye he makes all
measurements. The eye is truth (satyam), for the person
(purusha) dwelling in the eye proceeds to all things
(knows all objects with certainty). Therefore let a
man worship with the Vyahritis, Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svar, for
thus Pragapati, the Self of All, is worshipped as
the (sun, the) Eye of All. For thus it is said:
`This (the sun) is Pragapati's all-supporting body, for in it
this all is hid (by the light of the sun); and in
this all it (the light) is hid. Therefore this is worshipped.' 
Section 7
(The Savitri begins:) Tat Savitur varenyam, i.e. `this of
Savitri, to be chosen.' Here the Aditya (sun) is
Savitri, and the same is to be chosen by the love(r) of
Self, thus say the Brahma-teachers.
(Then follows the next foot in the Savitri): Bhargo devasya
dhimahi, i.e. `the splendour of the god we
meditate on.' Here the god is Savitri, and therefore he
who is called his splendour, him I meditate on,
thus say the Brahma-teachers.
(Then follows the last foot): Dhiyo yo nah prakodayat, i.e.
`who should stir up our thoughts.' Here the
dhiyah are thoughts, and he should stir these up for us,
thus say the Brahma-teachers.
(He now explains the word bhargas). Now he who is
called bhargas is he who is placed in yonder Aditya
(sun), or he who is the pupil in the eye. And he is so
called, because his going (gati) is by rays (bhabhih);
or because he parches (bhargayati) and makes the world
to shrivel up. Rudra is called Bhargas, thus say
the Brahma-teachers. Or bha means that he lights up
these worlds; ra, that he delights these beings, ga
that these creatures go to him and come from him;
therefore being a bha-ra-ga, he is called Bhargas.
Surya (sun) is so called, because Soma is continually
squeezed out (su). Savitri (sun) is so called, because
he brings forth (su). Aditya (sun) is so called, because he
takes up (ada, scil. vapour, or the life of man).
Pavana is so called, because he purifies (pu). Apas,
water, is so called, because it nourishes (pya).
And it is said:
`Surely the Self (absorbed in Prana, breath), which is
called Immortal, is the thinker, the perceiver, the
goer, the evacuator, the delighter, the doer, the speaker,
the taster, the smeller, the seer, the hearer, and he
touches. He is Vibhu (the pervader), who has entered
into the body.' And it is said:
 
 `When the knowledge is twofold (subjective and
objective), then he hears, sees, smells, tastes, and
touches
(something), for it is the Self that knows everything.'
But when the knowledge is not twofold (subjective only),
without effect, cause, and action, without a
name, without a comparison, without without a predicate
what is that? It cannot be told.
Section 8
And the same Self is also called Isana (lord), Sambhu,
Bhava, Rudra (tamasa); Pragapati (lord of
creatures), Visvasrig (creator of all), Hiranyagarbha,
Satyam (truth), Prana (breath), Hamsa (ragasa);
Sastri (ruler), Vishnu, Narayana (sattvika); Arka, Savitri,
Dhatri (supporter), Vidhatri (creator), Samrag
(king), Indra, Indu (moon). He is also he who warms, the
Sun, hidden by the thousand-eyed golden egg,
as one fire by another. He is to be thought after, he is to
be sought after. Having said farewell to all living
beings, having gone to the forest, and having renounced
all sensuous objects, let man perceive the Self
from his own body.
`(See him) who assumes all forms, the golden, who
knows all things, who ascends highest, alone in his
splendour, and warms us; the thousand-rayed, who
abides in a hundred places, the spirit of all creatures,
the Sun, rises.'
Section 9
Therefore he who by knowing this has become the Self of
both Breath and Sun, meditates (while
meditating on them) on his Self, sacrifices (while
sacrificing to them) to his Self this meditation, the
mind thus absorbed in these acts, is praised by the wise.
Then let him purify the contamination of the mind by the
verse Ukkhishtopahatam, &c.: `Be it food left,
or food defiled by left food, be it food given by a sinner,
food coming from a dead person, or from one
impure from childbirth, may the purifying power of Vasu,
may Agni, and the rays of Savitri, purify it, and 
all my sin.'
First (before eating) he surrounds (the offered food) with
water (in rincing his mouth). Then saying,
Svaha to Prana, Svaha to Apana, Svaha to Vyana, Svaha
to Samana, Svaha to Udana, he offers (the food)
with five invocations (in the fire of the mouth). What is
over, he eats in silence, and then he surrounds
(the food) once more afterwards with water (rincing the
mouth after his meal). Having washed let him,
after sacrificing to himself, meditate on his Self with these
two verses, Prano 'gnih and Visvo 'si, viz.
`May the Highest Self as breath, as fire (digestive heat),
as consisting of the five vital airs, having entered
(the body), himself satisfied, satisfy all, he who protects
all.' `Thou art Visva (all), thou art Vaisvanara
(fire), all that is born is upheld by thee; may all offerings
enter into thee; creatures live where thou
grantest immortality to all.' He who eats according to this
rule, does not in turn become food for others.
Section 10
There is something else to be known. There is a further
modification of this Self-sacrifice (the eating),
namely, the food and the eater thereof. This is the
explanation. The thinking Purusha (person), when he
abides within the Pradhana (nature), is the feeder who
feeds on the food supplied by Prakriti (nature).
The elemental Self is truly his food, his maker being
Pradhana (nature). Therefore what is composed of
the three qualities (gunas) is the food, but the person
within is the feeder. And for this the evidence is
supplied by the senses. For animals spring from seed,
and as the seed is the food, therefore it is clear that
what is food is Pradhana (the seed or cause of
everything). Therefore, as has been said, the Purusha
(person) is the eater, Prakriti, the food; and abiding within
it he feeds. All that begins with the Mahat
(power of intellect) and ends with the Viseshas
(elements), being developed from the distinction of nature
with its three qualities, is the sign (that there must be a
Purusha, an intelligent subject). And in this
manner the way with its fourteen steps has been
explained. (This is comprehended in the following 
verse): `This world is indeed the food, called pleasure,
pain, and error (the result of the three qualities);
there is no laying hold of the taste of the seed (cause), so
long as there is no development (in the shape of
effect).' And in its three stages also it has the character
of food, as childhood, youth, and old age; for,
because these are developed, therefore there is in them
the character of food.
And in the following manner does the perception of
Pradhana (nature) take place, after it has become
manifest: Intellect and the rest, such as determination,
conception, consciousness, are for the tasting (of
the effects of Pradhana). Then there are the five
(perceptive organs) intended for the (five) objects of
senses, for to taste them. And thus are all acts of the five
active organs, and the acts of the five Pranas or
vital airs (for the tasting of their corresponding objects).
Thus what is manifest (of nature) is food, and
what is not manifest is food. The enjoyer of it is without
qualities, but because he has the quality of being
an enjoyer, it follows that he possesses intelligence.
As Agni (fire) is the food-eater among the gods, and
Soma the food, so he who knows this eats food by
Agni (is not defiled by food, as little as Agni, the sacrificial
fire). This elemental Self, called Soma (food),
is also called Agni, as having undeveloped nature for its
mouth (as enjoying through nature, and being
independent of it), because it is said, `The Purusha
(person) enjoys nature with its three qualities, by the
mouth of undeveloped nature.' He who knows this, is an
ascetic, a yogin, he is a performer of the Selfsacrifice (see before). And he who does not touch the
objects of the senses when they intrude on him, as
no one would touch women intruding into an empty
house, he is an ascetic, a yogin, a performer of the
Self-sacrifice.
Section 11
This is the highest form of Self, viz. food, for this Prana
(this body) subsists on food. If it eats not, it
cannot perceive, hear, touch, see, smell, taste, and it
loses the vital airs. For thus it is said: 
`If it eats, then in full possession of the vital airs, it can
perceive, hear, touch, speak, taste, smell, see.'
And thus it is said:
`From food are born all creatures that live on earth;
afterwards they live on food, and in the end (when
they die) they return to it.'
Section 12
And thus it is said elsewhere: Surely all these creatures
run about day and night, wishing to catch food.
The sun takes food with his rays, and by it he shines.
These vital airs digest, when sprinkled with food.
Fire flares up by food, and by Brahma (Pragapati),
desirous of food, has all this been made. Therefore let
a man worship food as his Self. For thus it is said:
`From food creatures are born, by food they grow when
born; because it is eaten and because it eats
creatures, therefore it is called food (annam).'
Section 13
And thus it is said elsewhere: This food is the body of the
blessed Vishnu, called Visvabhrit (allsustaining). Breath is the essence of food, mind of
breath, knowledge of mind, joy of knowledge. He who
knows this is possessed of food, breath, mind,
knowledge, and joy. Whatever creatures here on earth
eat
food, abiding in them he, who knows this, eats food.
Food has been called undecaying, food has been
called worshipful; food is the breath of animals, food is
the oldest, food has been called the physician.
Section 14
And thus it has been said elsewhere: Food is the cause of
all this, time of food, and the sun is the cause of
time. The (visible) form of time is the year, consisting of
twelve months, made up of Nimeshas
(twinklings) and other measures. Of the year one half
(when the sun moves northward) belongs to Agni,
the other to Varuna (when the sun moves southward).
That which belongs to Agni begins with the 
asterism of Magha and ends with half of the asterism of
Sravishtha, the sun stepping down northward.
That which belongs to Soma (instead of Varuna) begins
with the asterism (of Aslesha), sacred to the
Serpents, and ends with half of the asterism of
Sravishtha, the sun stepping up southward. And then
there
(are the months) one by one, belonging to the year, each
consisting of nine-fourths of asterisms (two
asterisms and a quarter being the twelfth part of the
passage of the sun through the twenty-seven
Nakshatras), each determined by the sun moving
together with the asterisms. Because time is
imperceptible by sense, therefore this (the progress of the
sun, &c.) is its evidence, and by it alone is time
proved to exist. Without proof there is no apprehension
of what is to be proved; but even what is to be
proved can become proof, for the sake of making itself
known, if the parts (the twinklings, &c.) can be
distinguished from the whole time). For thus it is said:
`As many portions of time as there are, through them the
sun proceeds: he who worships time as
Brahman, from him time moves away very far.' And thus
it is said:
`From time all beings flow, from time they grow; in time
they obtain rest; time is visible (sun) and
invisible (moments).'
Section 15
There are two forms of Brahman, time and non-time.
That which was before the (existence of the) sun is
non-time and has no parts. That which had its beginning
from the sun is time and has parts. Of that
which has parts, the year is the form, and from the year
are born all creatures; when produced by the year
they grow, and go again to rest in the year. Therefore the
year is Pragapati, is time, is food, is the nest of
Brahman, is Self. Thus it is said:
`Time ripens and dissolves all beings in the great Self, but
he who knows into what time itself is
dissolved, he is the knower of the Veda.' 
Section 16
This manifest time is the great ocean of creatures. He
who is called Savitri (the sun, as begetter) dwells in
it, from whence the moon, stars, planets, the year, and
the rest are begotten. From them again comes all
this, and thus, whatever of good or evil is seen in this
world, comes from them. Therefore Brahman is the
Self of the sun, and a man should worship the sun under
the name of time. Some say the sun is Brahman,
and thus it is said:
`The sacrificer, the deity that enjoys the sacrifice, the
oblation, the hymn, the sacrifice, Vishnu, Pragapati,
all this is the Lord, the witness, that shines in yonder orb.'
Section 17
In the beginning Brahman was all this. He was one, and
infinite; infinite in the East, infinite in the
South, infinite in the West, infinite in the North, above and
below and everywhere infinite. East and the
other regions do not exist for him, nor across, nor below,
nor above. The Highest Self is not to be fixed,
he is unlimited, unborn, not to be reasoned about, not to
be conceived. He is like the ether (everywhere),
and at the destruction of the universe, he alone is awake.
Thus from that ether he wakes all this world,
which consists of thought only, and by him alone is all this
meditated on, and in him it is dissolved. His
is that luminous form which shines in the sun, and the
manifold light in the smokeless fire, and the heat
which in the stomach digests the food. Thus it is said:
`He who is in the fire, and he who is in the heart, and he
who is in the sun, they are one and the same.'
He who knows this becomes one with the one.
Section 18
This is the rule for achieving it (viz. concentration of the
mind on the object of meditation): restraint of
the breath, restraint of the senses, meditation, fixed
attention, investigation, absorption, these are called 
the sixfold Yoga. When beholding by this Yoga, he
beholds the gold-coloured maker, the lord, the
person, Brahman, the cause, then the sage, leaving
behind good and evil, makes everything (breath,
organs of sense, body, &c.) to be one in the Highest
Indestructible (in the pratyagatman or Brahman).
And thus it is said:
`As birds and deer do not approach a burning mountain,
so sins never approach those who know
Brahman.'
Section 19
And thus it is said elsewhere: When he who knows has,
while he is still Prana (breath), restrained his
mind, and placed all objects of the senses far away from
himself, then let him remain without any
conceptions. And because the living person, called
Prana (breath), has been produced here on earth from
that which is not Prana (the thinking Self), therefore let
this Prana merge the Prana (himself) in what is
called the fourth. And thus it is said:
`What is without thought, though placed in the centre of
thought, what cannot be thought, the hidden, the
highest let a man merge his thought there: then will this
living being (linga) be without attachment.'
Section 20
And thus it has been said elsewhere: There is the
superior fixed attention (dharana) for him, viz. if he
presses the tip of the tongue down the palate and
restrains voice, mind, and breath, he sees Brahman by
discrimination (tarka). And when, after the cessation of
mind, he sees his own Self, smaller than small,
and shining, as the Highest Self, then having seen his
Self as the Self, he becomes Self-less, and because
he is Self-less, he is without limit, without cause,
absorbed in thought. This is the highest mystery, viz.
final liberation. And thus it is said:
`Through the serenity of the thought he kills all actions,
good or bad; his Self serene, abiding in the Self,
obtains imperishable bliss.' 
Section 21
And thus it has been said elsewhere: The artery, called
Sushumna, going upwards (from the heart to the
Brahmarandhra), serving as the passage of the Prana, is
divided within the palate. Through that artery,
when it has been joined by the breath (held in subjection),
by the sacred syllable Om, and by the mind
(absorbed in the contemplation of Brahman), let him
proceed upwards, and after turning the tip of the
tongue to the palate, without using any of the organs of
sense, let greatness perceive greatness. From
thence he goes to selflessness, and through selflessness
he ceases to be an enjoyer of pleasure and pain, he
obtains aloneness (kevalatva, final deliverance). And
thus it is said:
`Having successively fixed the breath, after it had been
restrained, in the palate, thence having crossed the
limit (the life), let him join himself afterwards to the
limitless (Brahman) in the crown of the head.'
Section 22
And thus it has been said elsewhere: Two Brahmans
have to be meditated on, the word and the non-word.
By the word alone is the non-word revealed. Now there is
the word Om. Moving upward by it (where all
words and all what is meant by them ceases), he arrives
at absorption in the non-word (Brahman). This is
the way, this is the immortal, this is union, and this is
bliss. And as the spider, moving upward by the
thread, gains free space, thus also he who meditates,
moving upward by the syllable Om, gains
independence.
Other teachers of the word (as Brahman) think otherwise.
They listen to the sound of the ether within the
heart while they stop the ears with the thumbs. They
compare it to seven noises, like rivers, like a bell,
like a brazen vessel, like the wheels of a carriage, like the
croaking of frogs, like rain, and as if a man
speaks in a cavern. Having passed beyond this variously
apprehended sound, and having settled in the 
supreme, soundless (non-word), unmanifested Brahman,
they become undistinguished and
undistinguishable, as various flavours of the flowers are
lost in the taste of honey. And thus it is said:
`Two Brahmans are to be known, the word-Brahman and
the highest Brahman; he who is perfect in the
word-Brahman attains the highest Brahman.'
Section 23
And thus it has been said elsewhere: The syllable Om is
what is called the word. And its end is the silent,
the soundless, fearless, sorrowless, joyful, satisfied, firm,
unwavering, immortal, immovable, certain
(Brahman), called Vishnu. Let him worship these two,
that he may obtain what is higher than everything
(final deliverance). For thus it is said:
`He who is the high and the highest god, by name Omkara, he is soundless and free from all distinctions:
therefore let a man dwell on him in the crown of his head.'
Section 24
And thus it has been said elsewhere: The body is the
bow, the syllable Om is the arrow, its point is the
mind. Having cut through the darkness, which consists of
ignorance, it approaches that which is not
covered by darkness. Then having cut through that which
was covered (the personal soul), he saw
Brahman, flashing like a wheel on fire, bright like the sun,
vigorous, beyond all darkness, that which
shines forth in yonder sun, in the moon, in the fire, in the
lightning. And having seen him, he obtains
immortality. And thus it has been said:
`Meditation is directed to the highest Being (Brahman)
within, and (before) to the objects (body, Om,
mind); thence the indistinct understanding becomes
distinct.
And when the works of the mind are dissolved, then that
bliss which requires no other witness, that is
Brahman (Atman), the immortal, the brilliant, that is the
way, that is the (true) world.' 
Section 25
And thus it has been said elsewhere: He who has his
senses hidden as in sleep, and who, while in the
cavern of his senses (his body), but no longer ruled by
them, sees, as in a dream, with the purest intellect,
Him who is called Pranava (Om), the leader, the bright,
the sleepless, free from old age, from death, and
sorrow, he is himself also called Pranava, and becomes a
leader, bright, sleepless, free from old age, from
death, and sorrow. And thus it is said:
`Because in this manner he joins the Prana (breath), the
Om, and this Universe in its manifold forms, or
because they join themselves (to him), therefore this
(process of meditation) is called Yoga (joining).
The oneness of breath, mind, and senses, and then the
surrendering of all conceptions, that is called
Yoga.'
Section 26
And thus it has also been said elsewhere: As a
sportsman, after drawing out the denizens of the waters
with a net, offers them (as a sacrifice) in the fire of his
stomach, thus are these Pranas (vital airs), after
they have been drawn out with the syllable Om, offered in
the faultless fire (Brahman).
Hence he is like a heated vessel (full of clarified butter);
for as the clarified butter in the heated vessel
lights up, when touched with grass and sticks, thus does
this being which is called Not-breath (Atman)
light up, when touched by the Pranas (the vital airs). And
that which flares up, that is the manifest form
of Brahman, that is the highest place of Vishnu, that is the
essence of Rudra. And this, dividing his Self
in endless ways, fills all these worlds. And thus it is said:
`As the sparks from the fire, and as the rays from the sun,
thus do his Pranas and the rest in proper order
again and again proceed from him here on earth.'
Section 27 
And thus it has also been said elsewhere: This is the heat
of the highest, the immortal, the incorporeal
Brahman, viz. the warmth of the body. And this body is
the clarified butter (poured on it, by which the
heat of Brahman, otherwise invisible, is lighted up).
Then, being manifest, it is placed in the ether (of the
heart). Then by concentration they thus remove that
ether which is within the heart, so that its light
appears, as it were. Therefore the worshipper becomes
identified with that light without much delay. As
a ball of iron, if placed in the earth, becomes earth without
much delay, and as, when it has once become a
clod of earth, fire and smiths have nothing more to do
with that ball of iron, thus does thought (without
delay) disappear, together with its support. And thus it is
said:
`The shrine which consists of the ether in the heart, the
blissful, the highest retreat, that is our own, that is
our goal, and that is the heat and brightness of the fire
and the sun.'
Section 28
And thus it has been said elsewhere: After having left
behind the body, the organs of sense, and the
objects of sense (as no longer belonging to us), and
having seized the bow whose stick is fortitude and
whose string is asceticism, having struck down also with
the arrow, which consists in freedom from
egotism, the first guardian of the door of Brahman (for if
man looks at the world egotistically, then,
taking the diadem of passion, the earrings of greed and
envy, and the staff of sloth, sleep, and sin, and
having seized the bow whose string is anger, and whose
stick is lust, he destroys with the arrow which
consists of wishes, all beings) having therefore killed
that guardian, he crosses by means of the boat
Om to the other side of the ether within the heart, and
when the ether becomes revealed (as Brahman), he
enters slowly, as a miner seeking minerals in a mine, into
the Hall of Brahman. After that let him, by
means of the doctrine of his teacher, break through the
shrine of Brahman, which consists of the four nets 
(of food, breath, mind, knowledge, till he reaches the last
shrine, that of blessedness and identity with
Brahman). Thenceforth pure, clean, undeveloped,
tranquil, breathless, bodiless, endless, imperishable,
firm, everlasting, unborn and independent, he stands on
his own greatness, and having seen (the Self),
standing in his own greatness, he looks on the wheel of
the world as one (who has alighted from a chariot)
looks on its revolving wheel. And thus it is said:
`If a man practises Yoga for six months and is thoroughly
free (from the outer world), then the perfect
Yoga (union), which is endless, high, and hidden, is
accomplished.
But if a man, though well enlightened (by instruction), is
still pierced by (the gunas of) passion and
darkness, and attached to his children, wife, and house,
then perfect Yoga is never accomplished.'
Section 29
After he had thus spoken (to Brihadratha), Sakayanya,
absorbed in thought, bowed before him, and said:
`O King, by means of this Brahma-knowledge have the
sons of Pragapati (the Valakhilyas) gone to the
road of Brahman. Through the practice of Yoga a man
obtains contentment, power to endure good and
evil, and tranquillity. Let no man preach this most secret
doctrine to any one who is not his son or his
pupil, and who is not of a serene mind. To him alone who
is devoted to his teacher only, and endowed
with all necessary qualities, may he communicate it.
Section 30
Om! Having settled down in a pure place let him, being
pure himself, and firm in goodness, study the
truth, speak the truth, think the truth, and offer sacrifice to
the truth. Henceforth he has become another;
by obtaining the reward of Brahman his fetters are cut
asunder, he knows no hope, no fear from others as
little as from himself, he knows no desires; and having
attained imperishable, infinite happiness, he
stands blessed in the true Brahman, who longs for a true
man. Freedom from desires is, as it were, the 
highest prize to be taken from the best treasure
(Brahman). For a man full of all desires, being possessed
of will, imagination, and belief, is a slave; but he who is
the opposite, is free.
Here some say, it is the Guna (i.e. the so-called Mahat,
the principle of intellect which, according to the
Sankhyas, is the result of the Gunas or qualities), which,
through the differences of nature (acquired in the
former states of existence), goes into bondage to the will,
and that deliverance takes place (for the Guna)
when the fault of the will has been removed. (But this is
not our view), because (call it guna, intellect,
buddhi, manas, mind, ahankara, egotism, it is not the
mind that acts, but) he sees by the mind (as his
instrument), he hears by the mind; and all that we call
desire, imagination, doubt, belief, unbelief,
certainty, uncertainty, shame, thought, fear, all that is but
mind (manas). Carried along by the waves of
the qualities, darkened in his imaginations, unstable,
fickle, crippled, full of desires, vacillating, he enters
into belief, believing I am he, this is mine, and he binds
his Self by his Self, as a bird with a net.
Therefore a man, being possessed of will, imagination,
and belief, is a slave, but he who is the opposite is
free. For this reason let a man stand free from will,
imagination, and belief this is the sign of liberty,
this is the path that leads to Brahman, this is the opening
of the door, and through it he will go to the
other shore of darkness. All desires are there fulfilled.
And for this they quote a verse:
"When the five instruments of knowledge stand still
together with the mind, and when the intellect does
not move, that is called the highest state."'
Having thus said, Sakayanya became absorbed in
thought. Then Marut (i.e. the King Brihadratha),
having bowed before him and duly worshipped him, went
full of contentment to the Northern Path, for
there is no way thither by any side-road. This is the path
to Brahman. Having burst open the solar door,
he rose on high and went away. And here they quote:
`There are endless rays (arteries) for the Self who, like a
lamp, dwells in the heart: white and black, brown 
and blue, tawny and reddish.
One of them (the Sushumna) leads upwards, piercing the
solar orb: by it, having stepped beyond the world
of Brahman, they go to the highest path.
The other hundred rays rise upwards also, and on them
the worshipper reaches the mansions belonging to
the different bodies of gods.
But the manifest rays of dim colour which lead
downwards, by them a man travels on and on helplessly,
to
enjoy the fruits of his actions here.'
Therefore it is said that the holy Aditya (sun) is the cause
of new births (to those who do not worship
him), of heaven (to those who worship him as a god), of
liberty (to those who worship him as Brahman).
Section 31
Some one asks: `Of what nature are those organs of
sense that go forth (towards their objects)? Who
sends them out here, or who holds them back?'
Another answers: `Their nature is the Self; the Self sends
them out, or holds them back; also the Apsaras
(enticing objects of sense), and the solar rays (and other
deities presiding over the senses).'
Now the Self devours the objects by the five rays (the
organs of sense); then who is the Self?
He who has been defined by the terms pure, clean,
undeveloped, tranquil, &c., who is to be apprehended
independently by his own peculiar signs. That sign of him
who has no signs, is like what the pervading
heat is of fire, the purest taste of water; thus say some. It
is speech, hearing, sight, mind, breath; thus say
others. It is intellect, retention, remembering, knowledge;
thus say others. Now all these are signs of the
Self in the same sense in which here on earth shoots are
the signs of seed, or smoke, light, and sparks of
fire. And for this they quote: 
`As the sparks from the fire, and as the rays from the sun,
thus do his Pranas and the rest in proper order
again and again proceed from him here on earth.'
Section 32
From this very Self, abiding within his Self, come forth all
Pranas (speech, &c.), all worlds, all Vedas, all
gods, and all beings; its Upanishad (revelation) is that it is
`the true of the true.' Now as from a fire of
green wood, when kindled, clouds of smoke come forth
by themselves (though belonging to the fire), thus
from that great Being has been breathed forth all this
which is the Rig-veda, the Yagur-veda, the Samaveda, the Atharvangirasas (Atharva-veda), the Itihasa
(legendary stories), the Purana (accounts of the
creation, &c.), Vidya (ceremonial doctrines), the
Upanishads, the Slokas (verses interspersed in the
Upanishads, &c.), the Sutras (compendious statements),
the Anuvyakhyanas (explanatory notes), the
Vyakhyanas (elucidations) all these things are his.
Section 33
This fire (the Garhapatya-fire) with five bricks is the year.
And its five bricks are spring, summer, rainy
season, autumn, winter; and by them the fire has a head,
two sides, a centre, and a tail. This earth (the
Garhapatya-fire) here is the first sacrificial pile for
Pragapati, who knows the Purusha (the Virag). It
presented the sacrificer to Vayu (the wind) by lifting him
with the hands to the sky. That Vayu is Prana
(Hiranyagarbha).
Prana is Agni (the Dakshinagni-fire), and its bricks are the
five vital breaths, Prana, Vyana, Apana,
Samana, Udana; and by them the fire has a head, two
sides, a centre, and a tail. This sky (the
Dakshinagni-fire) here is the second sacrificial pile for
Pragapati, who knows the Purusha. It presented
the sacrificer to Indra, by lifting him with the hands to
heaven. That Indra is Aditya, the sun.
That (Indra) is the Agni (the Ahavaniya-fire), and its bricks
are the Rik, the Yagush, the Saman, the 
Atharvangirasas, the Itihasa, and the Purana; and by
them the fire has a head, two sides, a tail, and a
centre. This heaven (Ahavaniya-fire) is the third sacrificial
pile for Pragapati, who knows the Purusha.
With the hands it makes a present of the sacrificer to the
Knower of the Self (Pragapati); then the Knower
of the Self, lifting him up, presented him to Brahman. In
him he becomes full of happiness and joy.
Section 34
The earth is the Garhapatya-fire, the sky the Dakshinafire, the heaven the Ahavaniya-fire; and therefore
they are also the Pavamana (pure), the Pavaka
(purifying), and the Suki (bright). By this (by the three
deities, Pavamana, Pavaka, and Suki) the sacrifice (of the
three fires, the Garhapatya, Dakshina, and
Ahavaniya) is manifested. And because the digestive fire
also is a compound of the Pavamana, Pavaka,
and Suki, therefore that fire is to receive oblations, is to
be laid with bricks, is to be praised, and to be
meditated on. The sacrificer, when he has seized the
oblation, wishes to perform his meditation of the
deity:
`The gold-coloured bird abides in the heart, and in the
sun a diver bird, a swan, strong in splendour;
him we worship in the fire.'
Having recited the verse, he discovers its meaning, viz.
the adorable splendour of Savitri (sun) is to be
meditated on by him who, abiding within his mind,
meditates thereon. Here he attains the place of rest
for the mind, he holds it within his own Self. On this there
are the following verses:
(1) As a fire without fuel becomes quiet in its place, thus
do the thoughts, when all activity ceases,
become quiet in their place.
(2) Even in a mind which loves the truth and has gone to
rest in itself there arise, when it is deluded by
the objects of sense, wrongs resulting from former acts.
(3) For thoughts alone cause the round of births; let a
man strive to purify his thoughts. What a man 
thinks, that he is: this is the old secret.
(4) By the serenity of his thoughts a man blots out all
actions, whether good or bad. Dwelling within his
Self with serene thoughts, he obtains imperishable
happiness.
(5) If the thoughts of a man were so fixed on Brahman as
they are on the things of this world, who would
not then be freed from bondage?
(6) The mind, it is said, is of two kinds, pure or impure;
impure from the contact with lust, pure when
free from lust.
(7) When a man, having freed his mind from sloth,
distraction, and vacillation, becomes as it were
delivered from his mind, that is the highest point.
(8) The mind must be restrained in the heart till it comes
to an end; that is knowledge, that is liberty:
all the rest are extensions of the ties (which bind us to this
life).
(9) That happiness which belongs to a mind which by
deep meditation has been washed clean from all
impurity and has entered within the Self, cannot be
described here by words; it can be felt by the inward
power only.
(10) Water in water, fire in fire, ether in ether, no one can
distinguish them; likewise a man whose mind
has entered (till it cannot be distinguished from the Self),
attains liberty.
(11) Mind alone is the cause of bondage and liberty for
men; if attached to the world, it becomes bound; if
free from the world, that is liberty.
Therefore those who do not offer the Agnihotra (as
described above), who do not lay the fires (with the
bricks, as described above), who are ignorant (of the
mind being the cause of the round of births), who do
not meditate (on the Self in the solar orb) are debarred
from remembering the ethereal place of Brahman. 
Therefore that fire is to receive oblations, is to be laid with
bricks, is to be praised, to be meditated on.
Section 35
Adoration to Agni, the dweller on earth, who remembers
his world. Grant that world to this thy
worshipper!
Adoration to Vayu, the dweller in the sky, who remembers
his world. Grant that world to this thy
worshipper!
Adoration to Aditya, the dweller in heaven, who
remembers his world. Grant that world to this thy
worshipper!
Adoration to Brahman, who dwells everywhere, who
remembers all. Grant all to this thy worshipper!
The mouth of the true (Brahman) is covered with a golden
lid; open that, O Pushan (sun), that we may go
to the true one, who pervades all (Vishnu).
He who is the person in the sun, I am he.
And what is meant by the true one is the essence of the
sun, that which is bright, personal, sexless; a
portion (only) of the light which pervades the ether; which
is, as it were, in the midst of the sun, and in
the eye, and in the fire. That is Brahman, that is immortal,
that is splendour.
That is the true one, a portion (only) of the light which
pervades the ether, which is in the midst of the
sun, the immortal, of which Soma (the moon) and the vital
breaths also are offshoots: that is Brahman,
that is immortal, that is splendour.
That is the true one, a portion (only) of the light which
pervades the ether, which in the midst of the sun
shines as Yagus, viz. as Om, as water, light, essence,
immortal, Brahman, Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svar, Om.
`The eight-footed, the bright, the swan, bound with three
threads, the infinitely small, the imperishable, 
blind for good and evil, kindled with light he who sees
him, sees everything.'
A portion (only) of the light which pervades the ether, are
the two rays rising in the midst of the sun.
That is the knower (the Sun), the true one. That is the
Yagus, that is the heat, that is Agni (fire), that is
Vayu (wind), that is breath, that is water, that is the moon,
that is bright, that is immortal, that is the place
of Brahman, that is the ocean of light. In that ocean the
sacrificers are dissolved like salt, and that is
oneness with Brahman, for all desires are there fulfilled.
And here they quote:
`Like a lamp, moved by a gentle wind, he who dwells
within the gods shines forth. He who knows this, he
is the knower, he knows the difference (between the high
and the highest Brahman); having obtained
unity, he becomes identified with it.
They who rise up in endless number, like spray drops
(from the sea), like lightnings from the light within
the clouds in the highest heaven, they, when they have
entered into the light of glory (Brahman), appear
like so many flame-crests in the track of fire.'
Section 36
There are two manifestations of the Brahma-light: one is
tranquil, the other lively. Of that which is
tranquil, the ether is the support; of that which is lively,
food. Therefore (to the former) sacrifice must be
offered on the house-altar with hymns, herbs, ghee, meat,
cakes, sthalipaka, and other things; to the latter,
with meat and drinks (belonging to the great sacrifices)
thrown into the mouth, for the mouth is the
Ahavaniya-fire; and this is done to increase our bodily
vigour, to gain the world of purity, and for the sake
of immortality. And here they quote:
`Let him who longs for heaven, offer an Agnihotra. By an
Agnishtoma he wins the kingdom of Yama; by
Uktha, the kingdom of Soma; by a Shodasin-sacrifice, the
kingdom of Surya; by an Atiratra-sacrifice, the
kingdom of Indra; by the sacrifices beginning with the
twelve-night sacrifice and ending with the 
thousand years' sacrifice, the world of Pragapati.
As a lamp burns so long as the vessel that holds the wick
is filled with oil, these two, the Self and the
bright Sun, remain so long as the egg (of the world) and
he who dwells within it hold together.'
Section 37
Therefore let a man perform all these ceremonies with the
syllable Om (at the beginning). Its splendour is
endless, and it is declared to be threefold, in the fire (of
the altar), in the sun (the deity), in the breath (the
sacrificer). Now this is the channel to increase the food,
which makes what is offered in the fire ascend to
the sun. The sap which flows from thence, rains down as
with the sound of a hymn. By it there are vital
breaths, from them there is offspring. And here they
quote:
`The offering which is offered in the fire, goes to the sun;
the sun rains it down by his rays; thus food
comes, and from food the birth of living beings.'
And thus he said:
`The oblation which is properly thrown on the fire, goes
toward the sun; from the sun comes rain, from
rain food, from food living beings.'
Section 38
He who offers the Agnihotra breaks through the net of
desire. Then, cutting through bewilderment, never
approving of anger, meditating on one desire (that of
liberty), he breaks through the shrine of Brahman
with its four nets, and proceeds thence to the ether. For
having there broken through the (four) spheres of
the Sun, the Moon, the Fire, and Goodness, he then,
being purified himself, beholds dwelling in goodness,
immovable, immortal, indestructible, firm, bearing the
name of Vishnu, the highest abode, endowed with
love of truth and omniscience, the self-dependent
Intelligence (Brahman), standing in its own greatness.
And here they quote: 
`In the midst of the sun stands the moon, in the midst of
the moon the fire, in the midst of fire goodness,
in the midst of goodness the Eternal.'
Having meditated on him who has the breadth of a thumb
within the span (of the heart) in the body, who
is smaller than small, he obtains the nature of the
Highest; there all desires are fulfilled. And on this they
quote:
`Having the breadth of a thumb within the span (of the
heart) in the body, like the flame of a lamp,
burning twofold or threefold, that glorified Brahman, the
great God, has entered into all the worlds. Om!
Adoration to Brahman! Adoration!'

~ Chapter 7 ~
Seventh Prapathaka
Section 1
Agni, the Gayatra (metre), the Trivrit (hymn), the
Rathantara (song), the spring, the upward breath
(prana), the Nakshatras, the Vasus (deities) these rise in
the East; they warm, they rain, they praise
(the sun), they enter again into him (the sun), they look
out from him (the sun). He (the sun) is
inconceivable, without form, deep, covered, blameless,
solid, unfathomable, without qualities, pure,
brilliant, enjoying the play of the three qualities, awful, not
caused, a master-magician, the omniscient, the
mighty, immeasurable, without beginning or end, blissful,
unborn, wise, indescribable, the creator of all
things, the self of all things, the enjoyer of all things, the
ruler of all things, the centre of the centre of all
things.
Section 2
Indra, the Trishtubh (metre), the Pankadasa (hymn), the
Brihat (song), the summer, the through-going
breath (Vyana), Soma, the Rudras these rise in the
South; they warm, they rain, they praise, they enter 
again into him, they look out from him. He (the sun) is
without end or beginning, unmeasured, unlimited,
not to be moved by another, self-dependent, without sign,
without form, of endless power, the creator, the
maker of light.
Section 3
The Maruts, the Gagati (metre), the Saptadasa (hymn),
the Vairupa (song), the rainy season, the
downward breath (apana), Sukra, the Adityas these rise
in the West; they warm, they rain, they praise,
they enter again into him, they look out from him. That is
the tranquil, the soundless, fearless,
sorrowless, joyful, satisfied, firm, immovable, immortal,
eternal, true, the highest abode, bearing the name
of Vishnu.
Section 4
The Visve Devas, the Anushtubh (metre), the Ekavimsa
(hymn), the Vairaga (song), the autumn, the
equal breath (samana), Varuna, the Sadhyas these rise
in the North; they warm, they rain, they praise,
they enter again into him, they look out from him. He is
pure within, purifying, undeveloped, tranquil,
breathless, selfless, endless.
Section 5
Mitra-Varunau, the Pankti (metre), the
Trinavatrayastrimsa (hymns), the Sakvara-raivata
(songs), the
snowy and dewy seasons, the out-going breath (udana),
the Angiras, the Moon these rise above; they
warm, they rain, they praise, they enter again into him,
they look out from him who is called Pranava
(Om), the leader, consisting of light, without sleep, old
age, death, and sorrow.
Section 6
Sani (Saturn), Rahu and Ketu (the ascending and
descending nodes), the serpents, Rakshas, Yakshas,
men, birds, sarabhas, elephants, &c. these rise below;
they warm, they rain, they praise, they enter 
again into him, they look out from him he who is wise,
who keeps things in their right place, the centre
of all, the imperishable, the pure, the purifier, the bright,
the patient, the tranquil.
Section 7
And he is indeed the Self, smaller (than small) within the
heart, kindled like fire, endowed with all forms.
Of him is all this food, within him all creatures are woven.
That Self is free from sin, free from old age,
from death and grief, from hunger and thirst, imagining
nothing but what it ought to imagine, and
desiring nothing but what it ought to desire. He is the
highest lord, he is the supreme master of all beings,
the guardian of all beings, a boundary keeping all things
apart in their right places. He the Self, the lord,
is indeed Sambhu, Bhava, Rudra, Pragapati, the creator
of all, Hiranyagarbha, the true, breath, the swan,
the ruler, the eternal, Vishnu, Narayana. And he who
abides in the fire, and he who abides in the heart,
and he who abides in the sun, they are one and the
same. To thee who art this, endowed with all forms,
settled in the true ether, be adoration!
Section 8
Now follow the impediments in the way of knowledge, O
King! This is indeed the origin of the net of
bewilderment, that one who is worthy of heaven lives with
those who are not worthy of heaven. That is it.
Though they have been told that there is a grove before
them, they cling to a small shrub. And others also
who are always merry, always abroad, always begging,
always making a living by handiwork; and others
who are begging in towns, performing sacrifices for those
who are not allowed to offer sacrifices, who
make themselves the pupils of Sudras, and Sudras who
know the sacred books; and others who are
malignant, who use bad language, dancers, prizefighters, travelling mendicants, actors, those who have
been degraded in the king's service; and others who for
money pretend that they can lay (the evil
influences) of Yakshas, Rakshasas, ghosts, goblins,
devils, serpents, imps, &c.; and others who falsely 
wear red dresses, earrings, and skulls; and others who
wish to entice by the jugglery of false arguments,
mere comparisons and paralogisms, the believers in the
Veda with all these he should not live together.
They are clearly thieves, and unworthy of heaven. And
thus it is said:
`The world unsettled by the paralogisms of the denial of
Self, by false comparisons and arguments, does
not know what is the difference between Veda and
philosophy.'
Section 9
Brihaspati, having become Sukra, brought forth that false
knowledge for the safety of Indra and for the
destruction of the Asuras. By it they show that good is
evil, and that evil is good. They say that we ought
to ponder on the (new) law, which upsets the Veda and
the other sacred books. Therefore let no one
ponder on that false knowledge: it is wrong, it is, as it
were, barren. Its reward lasts only as long as the
pleasure lasts, as with one who has fallen from his caste.
Let that false science not be attempted, for thus
it is said:
(1) Widely opposed and divergent are these two, the one
known as false knowledge, the other as
knowledge. I (Yama) believe Nakiketas to be possessed
by a desire of knowledge; even many pleasures do
not move thee.
(2) (2) He who knows at the same time both the
imperfect (sacrifice, &c.) and the perfect knowledge (of
the Self), he crosses death by means of the imperfect,
and obtains immortality by means of the perfect
knowledge.
(3) Those who are wrapped up in the midst of imperfect
knowledge, fancying themselves alone wise and
learned, they wander about floundering and deceived, like
the blind led by the blind.
Section 10
 
 The gods and the demons, wishing to know the Self, went
into the presence of Brahman (their father,
Pragapati). Having bowed before him, they said: `O
blessed one, we wish to know the Self, do thou tell
us.' Then, after having pondered a long while, he
thought, these demons are not yet self-subdued;
therefore a very different Self was told to them (from what
was told to the gods). On that Self these
deluded demons take their stand, clinging to it, destroying
the true means of salvation (the Veda),
preaching untruth. What is untrue they see as true, as in
jugglery. Therefore, what is taught in the Vedas,
that is true. What is said in the Vedas, on that the wise
keep their stand. Therefore let a Brahman not
read what is not of the Veda, or this will be the result.
Section 11
This is indeed the nature of it (the Veda), the supreme
light of the ether which is within the heart. This is
taught as threefold, in the fire, in the sun, in the breath.
This is indeed the nature of it, the syllable Om,
of the ether which is within the heart. By it (by the Om)
that (light) starts, rises, breathes forth, becomes
for ever the means of the worship and knowledge of
Brahman. That (light, in the shape of Om), when
there is breathing, takes the place of the internal heat,
free from all brightness. This is like the action of
smoke; for when there is a breath of air, the smoke, first
rising to the sky in one column, follows
afterwards every bough, envelopes it and takes its shape.
It is like throwing salt (into water), like heating
ghee. The Veda comes and goes like the dissolving view
of a master-magician. And here they quote:
`Why then is it called "like lightning?" Because as soon
as it comes forth (as Om) it lights up the whole
body. Therefore let a man worship that boundless light
by the syllable Om.'
(1) The man in the eye who abides in the right eye, he is
Indra, and his wife abides in the left eye.
(2) The union of these two takes place in the cavity within
the heart, and the ball of blood which is there,
that is indeed the vigour and life of these two. 
(3) There is a channel going from the heart so far, and
fixed in that eye; that is the artery for both of
them, being one, divided into two.
(4) The mind excites the fire of the body, that fire stirs the
breath, and the breath, moving in the chest,
produces the low sound.
(5) Brought forth by the touch of the fire, as with a
churning-stick, it is at first a minim, from the minim
it becomes in the throat a double minim; on the tip of the
tongue know that it is a treble minim, and, when
uttered, they call it the alphabet ({stoicheia [greek]}).
(6) He who sees this, does not see death, nor disease,
nor misery, for seeing he sees all (objectively, not as
affecting him subjectively); he becomes all everywhere
(he becomes Brahman).
(7) There is the person in the eye, there is he who walks
as in sleep, he who is sound asleep, and he who
is above the sleeper: these are the four conditions (of the
Self), and the fourth is greater than all.
(8) Brahman with one foot moves in the three, and
Brahman with three feet is in the last.
It is that both the true (in the fourth condition) and the
untrue (in the three conditions) may have their
desert, that the Great Self (seems to) become two, yes,
that he (seems to) become two.
