Section 1
First Khanda
1:1. The Pupil asks: `At whose wish does the mind sent
forth proceed on its errand? At whose command
does the first breath go forth? At whose wish do we utter
this speech? What god directs the eye, or the
ear?'
1:2. The Teacher replies: `It is the ear of the ear, the
mind of the mind, the speech of speech, the breath
of breath, and the eye of the eye. When freed (from the
senses) the wise, on departing from this world,
become immortal.
1:3. `The eye does not go thither, nor speech, nor mind.
We do not know, we do not understand, how any
one can teach it.
1:4. `It is different from the known, it is also above the
unknown, thus we have heard from those of old,
who taught us this.
1:5. `That which is not expressed by speech and by
which speech is expressed, that alone know as
Brahman, not that which people here adore. 
1:6. `That which does not think by mind, and by which,
they say, mind is thought, that alone know as
Brahman, not that which people here adore.
1:7. `That which does not see by the eye, and by which
one sees (the work of) the eyes, that alone know as
Brahman, not that which people here adore.
1:8. `That which does not hear by the ear, and by which
the ear is heard, that alone know as Brahman,
not that which people here adore.
1:9. `That which does not breathe by breath, and by
which breath is drawn, that alone know as Brahman,
not that which people here adore.'
Section 2
Second Khanda
2:1. The Teacher says: `If thou thinkest I know it well,
then thou knowest surely but little, what is that
form of Brahman known, it may be, to thee?'
2:2. The Pupil says: `I do not think I know it well, nor do I
know that I do not know it. He among us who
knows this, he knows it, nor does he know that he does
not know it.
2:3. `He by whom it (Brahman) is not thought, by him it is
thought; he by whom it is thought, knows it
not. It is not understood by those who understand it, it is
understood by those who do not understand it.
2:4. `It is thought to be known (as if) by awakening, and
(then) we obtain immortality indeed. By the
Self we obtain strength, by knowledge we obtain
immortality.
2:5. `If a man know this here, that is the true (end of life);
if he does not know this here, then there is
great destruction (new births). The wise who have
thought on all things (and recognised the Self in them)
become immortal, when they have departed from this
world.' 
Section 3
Third Khanda
3:1. Brahman obtained the victory for the Devas. The
Devas became elated by the victory of Brahman,
and they thought, this victory is ours only, this greatness
is ours only.
3:2. Brahman perceived this and appeared to them. But
they did not know it, and said: `What sprite
(yaksha or yakshya) is this?'
3:3. They said to Agni (fire): `O Gatavedas, find out what
sprite this is.' `Yes,' he said.
3:4. He ran toward it, and Brahman said to him: `Who are
you?' He replied: `I am Agni, I am Gatavedas.'
3:5. Brahman said: `What power is in you?' Agni replied:
`I could burn all whatever there is on earth.'
3:6. Brahman put a straw before him, saying: `Burn this.'
He went towards it with all his might, but he
could not burn it. Then he returned thence and said: `I
could not find out what sprite this is.'
3:7. Then they said to Vayu (air): `O Vayu, find out what
sprite this is.' `Yes,' he said.
3:8. He ran toward it, and Brahman said to him: `Who are
you?' He replied: `I am Vayu, I am
Matarisvan.'
3:9. Brahman said: `What power is in you?' Vayu
replied: `I could take up all whatever there is on earth.'
3:10. Brahman put a straw before him, saying: `Take it
up.' He went towards it with all his might, but he
could not take it up. Then he returned thence and said: `I
could not find out what sprite this is.'
3:11. Then they said to Indra: `O Maghavan, find out
what sprite this is.' He went towards it, but it
disappeared from before him. 
3:12. Then in the same space (ether) he came towards a
woman, highly adorned: it was Uma, the
daughter of Himavat. He said to her: `Who is that sprite?'
Section 4
Fourth Khanda
4:1. She replied: `It is Brahman. It is through the victory
of Brahman that you have thus become great.'
After that he knew that it was Brahman.
4:2. Therefore these Devas, viz. Agni, Vayu, and Indra,
are, as it were, above the other gods, for they
touched it (the Brahman) nearest.
4:3. And therefore Indra is, as it were, above the other
gods, for he touched it nearest, he first knew it.
4:4. This is the teaching of Brahman, with regard to the
gods (mythological): It is that which now flashes
forth in the lightning, and now vanishes again.
4:5. And this is the teaching of Brahman, with regard to
the body (psychological): It is that which seems
to move as mind, and by it imagination remembers again
and again.
4:6. That Brahman is called Tadvana, by the name of
Tadvana it is to be meditated on. All beings have a
desire for him who knows this.
4:7. The Teacher: `As you have asked me to tell you the
Upanishad, the Upanishad has now been told
you. We have told you the Brahmi Upanishad.
4:8. `The feet on which that Upanishad stands are
penance, restraint, sacrifice; the Vedas are all its
limbs, the True is its abode.
4:9. `He who knows this Upanishad, and has shaken off
all evil, stands in the endless, unconquerable
world of heaven, yea, in the world of heaven.'
