1. All this, whatsoever moves on earth, is to be hidden in
the Lord (the Self). When thou hast
surrendered all this, then thou mayest enjoy. Do not
covet the wealth of any man!
2. Though a man may wish to live a hundred years,
performing works, it will be thus with him; but not in
any other way: work will thus not cling to a man.
3. There are the worlds of the Asuras covered with blind
darkness. Those who have destroyed their self
(who perform works, without having arrived at a
knowledge of the true Self), go after death to those
worlds.
4. That one (the Self), though never stirring, is swifter
than thought. The Devas (senses) never reached
it, it walked before them. Though standing still, it
overtakes the others who are running. Matarisvan (the
wind, the moving spirit) bestows powers on it.
5. It stirs and it stirs not; it is far, and likewise near. It is
inside of all this, and it is outside of all this.
6. And he who beholds all beings in the Self, and the Self
in all beings, he never turns away from it.
7. When to a man who understands, the Self has
become all things, what sorrow, what trouble can there
be to him who once beheld that unity?
8. He (the Self) encircled all, bright, incorporeal,
scatheless, without muscles, pure, untouched by evil; a
seer, wise, omnipresent, self-existent, he disposed all
things rightly for eternal years.
9. All who worship what is not real knowledge (good
works), enter into blind darkness: those who delight
in real knowledge, enter, as it were, into greater
darkness.
 
 10. One thing, they say, is obtained from real knowledge;
another, they say, from what is not knowledge.
Thus we have heard from the wise who taught us this.
11. He who knows at the same time both knowledge and
not-knowledge, overcomes death through notknowledge, and obtains immortality through knowledge.
12. All who worship what is not the true cause, enter into
blind darkness: those who delight in the true
cause, enter, as it were, into greater darkness.
13. One thing, they say, is obtained from (knowledge of)
the cause; another, they say, from (knowledge
of) what is not the cause. Thus we have heard from the
wise who taught us this.
14. He who knows at the same time both the cause and
the destruction (the perishable body), overcomes
death by destruction (the perishable body), and obtains
immortality through (knowledge of) the true cause.
15. The door of the True is covered with a golden disk.
Open that, O Pushan, that we may see the nature
of the True.
16. O Pushan, only seer, Yama (judge), Surya (sun), son
of Pragapati, spread thy rays and gather them!
The light which is thy fairest form, I see it. I am what He
is (viz. the person in the sun).
17. Breath to air, and to the immortal! Then this my body
ends in ashes. Om! Mind, remember!
Remember thy deeds! Mind, remember! Remember thy
deeds!
18. Agni, lead us on to wealth (beatitude) by a good path,
thou, O God, who knowest all things! Keep far
from us crooked evil, and we shall offer thee the fullest
praise! (Rv. 1, 189, 1.)
Note: This Upanishad, though apparently simple and
intelligible is in reality one of the most difficult to
understand properly. Coming at the end of the
Vagasaneyi-samhita in which the sacrifices and the
hymns 
to be used by the officiating priests have been described,
it begins by declaring that all has to be
surrendered to the Lord. The name is, lord, is peculiar,
as having a far more personal colouring than
Atman, Self, or Brahman, the usual names given by the
Upanishads to what is the object of the highest
knowledge.
Next follows a permission to continue the performance of
sacrifices, provided that all desires have been
surrendered. And here occurs our first difficulty which
has perplexed ancient as well as modern
commentators.
I shall tray, first of all, to justify my own translation. I hold
that the Upanishad wishes to teach the
uselessness by themselves of all good works, whether we
call them sacrificial, legal, or moral, and yet, at
the time, to recognise, if not the necessity, at least the
harmlessness of good works, provided they are
performed without any selfish motives, withoug any desire
of reward, but simply as a preparation for
higher knowledge, as a means, in fact, of subduing all
passions, and producing that serenity of mind
without which man is incapable of receiving the highest
knowledge. From that point of view the
Upanishad may well say, Let a man wish to live here his
appointed time, let him even perform all works.
If only he knows that all must be surrendered to the Lord,
then the work done by him will not cling to
him. It will not work on and produce effect after effect,
nor will it involve him in a succession of new
births in which to enjoy the reward of his works, but it will
leave him free to enjoy the blessings of the
highest knowledge. It will have served as a preparation
for that higher knowledge which the Upanishad
imparts, and which secures freedom from further births.
The expression `na karma lipyate nare' seems to me to
admit of this one explanation only, that work done
does not cling to man, provided he has acquired the
highest knowledge. Similar expressions occur again
and again. Lip was, no doubt, used originally of evil
deeds which became, as it were, engrained in man;
but afterwards of all work, even of good work, if done with
a desire of reward. The doctrine of the 
Upanishads is throughout that orthodoxy and sacrifice
can procure a limited beatitude only, and that they
are a hindrance to real salvation, which can be obtained
by knowledge alone. In our passage therefore we
can recognise one meaning only, viz. that work does not
cling to man or stain him, if only he knows, i.e.
if he has been enlightened by the Upanishad.
Sankara, in his colamentary on the Vedanta-sutras III, 4,
7; 13; 14, takes the same view of this passage.
The opponent of Badarayana, in this case, Gaimini
himself; maintains that karma, work, is indispensable
to knowledge, and among other arguments, he says, III,
4, 7, that it is so `Niyamat,' `Because it is so laid
down by the law.' The passage here referred to is,
according to Sankara, our very verse, which, he thinks,
should be translated as follows: `Let a man wish to live a
hundred years here (in this body) performing
works; thus will an evil deed not cling to thee, while thou
art a man; there is no other way but this by
which to escape the influence of works.' In answer to
this, Badarayana says, first of all, III, 4, 13, that this
rule may refer to men in general, and not to one who
knows; or, III, 4, 14, if it refers to a man who knows,
that then the permission to perform works is only intended
to exhalt the value of knowledge, the meaning
being that even to a man who performs sacrifices all his
life, work does not cling, if only he knows;
such being the power of knowledge.
The same Sankara, however, who here sees quite clearly
that this verse refers to a man who knows,
explains it in the Upanishad as referring to a man who
does not know
(itarasyanatmagnatayatmagrahanasakrasya). It would
then mean: `Let such a one, while perferming
works here on earth, wish to live a hundred years. In this
manner there is no other way for him but this
(the performance of sacrifices so that an evil deed should
not be engrained, or so that he should not be
stained by such a deed.' The first and second verses of
the Upanishad would thus represent the two paths
of life, that of knowledge and that of works, and the
following verses would explain the rewards assigned
to each. 
Mahidhara, in his commentary on the Vagasaneyisamhita, steers at first a middle course. He would
translate: `Let one who performs the Agnihotra and other
sacrifices, without any desire of reward, wish to
live here a hundred years. If thou do so, there will he
salvation for thee, not otherwise. There are many
roads that lead to heaven, but one only leading to
salvation, namely, performance of good works, without
any desire of reward, which produces a pure heart. Work
thus done, merely as a preparation for salvation,
does not cling to man, i.e. it produces a pure heart, but
does not entail any further consequences.' So far
he agrees with Uvata's explanation. He allows, however,
another explanation also, soj that the second line
would convey the meaning: `If a man lives thus
(performing good works), then there is no other way by
which an evil deed should not be engrained; i.e. in order
to escape the power of sin, he must all his life
perform sacred acts.'
Next follows a description of the lot of those who,
immersed in works, have not arrived at the higest
knowledge, and have not recovered their true self in the
Highest Self, or Brahman. That Brahman,
though the name is not used here, is then described, and
salvation is promised to the man who beholds all
things in the Self and the Self in all things.
The verses 9-14 are again full of difficulty, not so much in
themselves as in relation to the general system
of thought which prevails in the Upanishads, and forms
the foundation of the Vedanta philosophy. The
commentators vary considerably in their interpretations.
Sankara explains avidya, not-knowledge, by
good works, particularly sacrifice, performed with a hope
of reward; vidya, or knowledge, by a knowledge
of the gods, but not, as yet, of the highest Brahman. The
former is generally supposed to lead the
sacrificer to the pitriloka, the world of the fathers, from
whence he returns to a new series of births; the
latter to the devaloka, the world of the gods, from whence
he may either proceed to Brahman, or enter
upon a new round of existence. The question then
arises, how in our passage the former could be said to
lead to blind darkness, the latter to still greater darkness.
But for that statement, I have no doubt that all 
the commentators would, as usual, have taken vidya for
the knowledge of the Highest Brahman, and
avidya for orthodox belief in the gods and good works, the
former securing in immortality in the sense of
freedom from new births, while the reward of the latter is
blessedness in heaven for a limited period, but
without freedom from new births.
This antithesis between vidya and avidya seems to me so
firmly established that I cannot bring myself to
surrender it here. Though this Upanishad has its own
very peculiar character, yet its object is, after all, to
impart a knowledge of the Highest Self, and not to
inculcate merely a difference between faith In the
ordinary gods and good works. It was distinctly said
before (ver. 3), that those who have destroyed their
self i.e. who perform works only, and have not arrived at a
knowledge of the true Self, go to the worlds of
the Asuras, which are covered with blind darkness. If
then the same blind darkness is said in verse 9 to be
the lot of those who worship not-knowlege, this can only
mean those who have not discovered the true
Self, but are satisfied with the performance of good
works. And if those who perform good works are
opposed to others who delight in true knowledge, that
knowledge can be the knowledge of the true Self
only.
The difficulty therefore which has perplexed Sankara is
this, how, while the orthodox believer is said to
enter into blind darkness, the true disciple, who has
acquired a knowledge of the true Self, could be said to
enter into still greater darkness. While Sankara in this
case seems hardly to have caught the drift of the
Upanishad, Uvata and Mahidhara propose an explanation
which is far more satisfactory. They perceive
that the chief stress must be laid on the words ubhayam
saha, `both together,' in verses 11 and 14. The
doctrine of certain Vedanta philosophers was that works,
though they cannot by themselves lead to
salvation, are useful as a preparation for the highest
knowledge, and that those who imagine that they can
attaln the highest knowledge without such previous
preparation, are utterly mistaken. From this point of
view therefore the author of the Upanishad might well say
that those who give themselves to what is not 
knowledge, i.e. sacrificial and other good works, enter
into darkness, but that those who delight altogether
in knowledge, despising the previous discipline of works,
deceive themselves and enter into still greater
darkness.
Then follows the next verse, simply stating that, according
to the teaching of wise people, the reward of
knowledge is one thing, the reward of ignorance, i.e. trust
in sacrifice, other. Here Mahidhara is right
again by assigning the pitriloka, the world of the fathers,
as the reward of the ignorant; the devaloka, the
world of the gods, as the reward of the enlightened,
provided that from the world of the gods they pass on
to the knowledge of the Highest Self or Brahman.
The third verse contains the strongest confirmation of
Mahidhara's view. Here it is laid down distinctly
that he only who knows both together, both what is called
ignorance and what is called knowledge, can be
saved, because by good works he overcomes death, here
expiained by natural works, and by knowledge he
obtains the Immortal, here explained by oneness with the
gods, the last step that leads on to oneness with
Brahman.
Uvata, who takes the same view of these verses, explains
at once, and even more boldly than Mahidhara
vidya, or knowledge, by brahavignana, knowledge of
Brahman, which by itself, and if not preceded by
works, leads to even greater darkness than what is called
ignorance, i.e. sacrifice and orthodoxy without
knowledge.
The three corresponding verses, treating of sambhuti and
asambhuti instead of vidy and avidya, stand first
in the Vagasaneyi-samhita. They must necessarily be
explained in accordance with our explanation of
the former verses, i.e. sambhuti must correspond to
vidya, it must be meant for the true cause, i.e. for
Brahman, while asambhuti must correspond with avidya,
as a name of what is not real but phenomenal
only and perishable.
Mahidhara thinks that these verses refer to the
Bauddhas, which can hardly be admitted, unless we take 
Buddhist in a very general sense. Uvata puts the
Lokayatas in their place. It is curious also to observe
that Mahidhara, following Uvata, explains asambhuti at
first by the denial of the resurrection of the body,
while he takes sambhuti rightly for Brahman. I have
chiely followed Uvata's commentary, except in his
first explanation of asambhuti, resurrection. In what
follows Uvata explains sambhuti rightly by the only
cause fo the origin of the whole world, i.e. Brahman, while
he takes vinasa, destruction, as a name of the
perishable body.
Sankara sees much more in these verses than Uvata. He
takes asambhuti as a name of Prakriti, the
undeveloped cause, sambhuti as as a name of the
phenomenal Brahman or Hiranyagarbha. From a
worship of the latter a man obtains supernataral powers,
from devotion to the former, absorption in
Prakriti.
Mahidhara also takes a similar view, and he allows, like
Sankara, another reading, viz. sambhutim
avinasam ka, and avinasena mrityum tirtva. In this case
the sense would be: `He who knows the worship
both of the developed and the undeveloped, overcomes
death, it.e. such evil as sin, passion, &c., through
worship of the undeveloped, while he obtains through
worship of the developed, i.e. of Hiranyagarbha,
immortality, absorption in Prakriti.'
All these forced explanations to which the commentators
have recourse, arise from the shifting views held
by various authorities with regard to the value of works.
Our Upanishad seems to me to propound the
doctrine that works, though in themselves useless, or
even mischievous, if performed with a view to any
present or future rewards, are necessary as a preparatory
discipline. This is or was for a long time the
orthodox view. Each man was required to pass through
the asramas, or stages of student and householder, before he was admitted to the freedom of a
Sannyasin. As on a ladder, no step was to be skipped.
Those who attempted to do so were considered to have
broken the old law, and in some respects they may
indeed be looked upon as the true precursors of the
Buddhists. 
Nevertheless the opposite doctrine, that a man whose
mind had become enlightened, might at once drop
the fetters of the law, without performing all the tedious
duties of student and house-holder; had strong
supporters too among orthodox philosophers. Cases of
such rapid conversion occur in the ancient
traditions, and Badarayana himself was obliged to admit
the possibility of freedom and savation without
works, though maintaining the superiority of the usual
course, which led on gradually from works to
enlightenment and salvation. It was from an
unwillingness to assent to the decided teaching of the Isaupanishad that Sankara attempted to explain vidya,
knowledge, in a limited sense, as knowledge of the
gods, and not yet knowledge of Brahman. He would not
admit that knowledge without works could lead
to darkness, and even to greater darkness than works
without knowledge. Our Upanishad seems to have
dreaded libertinism, knowledge without works, more even
than ritualism, works without knowledge, and
its true object was to show that orthodoxy and sacrifice,
though useless in themselves, must always form
the preparation for higher enlightenment.
How misleading Sankara's explanation may prove, we
can see from the translation of this Upanishad by
Rammohun Roy. He followed Sankara implicitly, and this
is the sense which he drew from the text:
`9. Those observers of religious rites that perform only the
worship of the sacred fire, and oblations to
sages, to ancestors, to men, and to other creatures,
without regarding the worship of celestial gods, shall
enter into the dark region: and those practisers of
religious ceremonies who habitually worship the
celestial gods only, disregarding the worship of the
sacred fire, and oblations to sages, to ancestors, to
men, and to other creatures, shall enter into a regon still
darker than the former.
`10. It is said that adoration of the celestial gods produces
one consequence; and that the performance of
the worship of sacred fire, and oblations to sages, to
ancestors, to men, and to other creatures, produce 
another: thus have we heard from learned men, who have
distinctly explained the subject to us.
`11. Of those observers of ceremonies whosoever,
knowing that adoration of celestial gods as well as the
worship of the sacred fire, and oblation to the sages, to
ancestors, to men, and to other creatures, should be
observed alike by the same individual, performs them
both, will, by means of the latter, surmount the
obstacles presented by natural temptations, and will
attain the state of the celestial gods through the
practice of the former.
`12. Those observers of religious rites who worship
Prakriti alone (Prakriti or nature, who, though
insensible, influenced by the Supreme Spirit, operates
throughout the universe) shall enter into the dark
region: and those practisers of religious ceremonies that
are devoted to worship solely the prior operating
sensitive particle, allegorically called Brahma, shall enter
into a region much more dark than the former.
`13. It is said that one consequence may be attained by
the worship of Brahma, and another by the
adoration of Prakriti. Thus have we heard from learned
men, who have distinctly explained the subject to
us.
`14. Of those observers of ceremonies, whatever person,
knowing that the adoration of Prakriti and that of
Brahma should be together observed by the same
individual, performs them both, will by means of the
latter overcome indigence, and will attain the state of
Prakriti, through the practice of the former.'
